My works play an important role as mediator in the
geo-political landscape, where I seek to place it within the context
of place/site and the intersection of high culture and daily life. In
the featured works, materiality, form, and concept come together in an
expression of each artist’s personal values and experience of the world.
These range from place-specific issues of social justice and political
oppression to the universal concerns of love and family.

Includes the use of the “loop,” narrative structures, sculptural installations/environments, and dialogues with complementary two-dimensional works. The New Genres Department at the San Francisco
Art Institute has been a pioneer in performance, moving image, and
installation, and a breeding ground for work at the intersection of the
three mediums.
This is a remarkable work being shown here for the first time in Canada. It is a reinterpretation of the twelve bronze animal
heads, representing the traditional Chinese zodiac, that used to adorn the famous water clock at the imperial gardens of Yuanming Yuan in Beijing.

The work suggests a vivarium of surprising size that interweaves a multitude of threads introducing the idea of movement and perpetual metamorphosis.
successful one. UBS has a strong tradition of sponsorship in which both
the sponsor and the project owner act as partners to develop common
ideas and grow together. UBS wants to combine the financial with a
cultural commitment and to take on longterm responsibility in projects
that are meaningful to the society. Sharing strong sustainable values
such as teamwork, high standards of quality, dedication and innovation,
Art Basel Miami Beach is pleased to have UBS as main sponsor for the new
international art show.
The examination of political, social, economic and personal realities is
picked out as a central theme in the sociologically oriented work of
several young artists. While video art, installations, multimedia works
and process art are in the foreground, various currents in postmodern
painting, as they appear at the beginning of the new millennium, are
also on display in Miami Beach.

Although, seen in a broader art-historical context, the painting of the
power, placing the viewer in the world of video game images, cut up and
put together again by Chris Finley in postpop cubist style. In his
sponsored booth, the Swiss artist Lori Hersberger (mezzanine) shows a
multimedia installation with a wall painting in fluorescent luminous
colors, neon light and a broken mirror. The art duo Tim Noble and Sue
Webster (Modern Art), who place seemingly randomly chosen piles of
household garbage in a dark room and illuminate them with a bright
light, creating perfect silhouettes of the artist duo, may also be
considered as related to the field of painting. For «Art Statements» the
two artists are suggesting an ambitious 360º installation.The dissection of differing cultural norms also becomes clear in the
work of the Japanese artist Tam Ochiai (Tomio Koyama Gallery) and the
Nigerian artist Odili Donald Odita (Florence Lynch Galllery). While the
Japanese artist transforms his great interest in western culture, film,
literature, the world of fashion, and advertising into an installation,
the Nigerian artist in his multimedia work manipulates cultural
boundaries, exposes cultural imperialism, and plays with stereotypes of
western culture.
temporal marker to spark debate about how and when the first new
theoretical and artistic ground was broken, positing the point at which
the “expanded arts” of the Sixties could first be glimpsed. Choosing a
field of radical invention before the leading names and terms of the
decade were critically and historically defined—considering precursors
such as Anna Halprin and John Cage, and breakthrough 1961 work by
figures such as La Monte Young, Robert Morris, George Brecht, Henry
Flynt, Simone Forti, Jackson Mac Low, Walter de Maria, George Maciunas,
Ray Johnson, Emmett Williams, Nam June Paik, Yoko Ono, et al—the
exhibition traces the initial crystallization of certain key ideas. At
the center of this is the musical score, subjected to unprecedented
experimentation, which became the ur-model for all the arts, rupturing
disciplinary and medium specificity, revealing a newly activated
creative field that extends from the postmodern to now.

In recent years there has been a renewed interest in the work of the
Austrian utopian philosopher Otto Neurath (1882-1945), in fields as
various as fine art, design, philosophy, cultural theory and urban
studies. With the After Neurath project Stroom poses the question what
Neurath, this architect of modernity, this social engineer, can teach us
today. The exhibition brings together a group of artists whose work
engages with the implications of the work of Neurath. They investigate
the possibilities of collectively building a better future, the
unification of different fields of knowledge and emancipation through
organisation. Subjects closely linked to the social-democratic ideals
from the past, which now, at the start of the 21st century tend to be
submerged in a culture of individualism, consumerism and indifference.

*The Bureau d’études* (F) shows the latest in a series of works that
make the usually invisible links between the institutions that shape our
lives (industry, governmental agencies) visible.
Alice Creischer & Andreas Siekmann (USA/G) show a series of
collaborative works that use the forms and language of Neurath and Arntz
to ask questions of contemporary relevance.
Stephan Dillemuths (G) recent work is concerned with groups that came to
be collectively known as the Life Reform Movement.
 puts up a discussion about a money-driven world using
cartoon-like imagery.The past remembered or rather memorised? Based on facts or feelings?
Material or immaterial? In his 1981 feature film, The Man of Iron,
Andrzej Wajda re-enacted the scenes memorised from famous photographs
and TV news items from the strikes in Gdansk Shipyard. He mixed up
staged situations with genuine documentary recordings, making not only a
movie but, more importantly, a significant operation on the collective
memory. Along with the famous Solidarnosc logo by Jerzy Janiszewski, the
film lays the foundations of the international visual legacy of the
1980s in Poland. Aneta Szylak, the curator, takes these two artefacts as
points of departure for Dockwatchers, building the intellectual premises
of the exhibition on re-enactment, revision of symbolic values as well
as visible and invisible shifts in cultural memory.

It asks about oral histories, cracks in memories,
abandoned visions and desolated heroes. Dockwatchers addresses the
person, the individual, caught up in political and historical processes,
whose personal memory is inscribed in collective experiences, the
official representations of history and various forms of commemoration
and mythologisation.If I Cant Dance is not trying to sum up a contemporary feminist art or
to collate an aesthetic for feminism, but rather to explore how feminist
thinking on all levels (social, artistic, political, theoretical,
ideological or structural) may be important in our cultural life. There
is currently a rich artistic discourse, which taps into this legacy and
manifests itself in the materiality and language of visual art, but also
interrogates how artists choose to perform themselves and their work
within the dominant visual economy. The project aims to explore these
tendencies as inquisitively and openly as possible.

Developing If I Cant Dance... with De Appel makes it possible to
articulate a historical context for this legacy very precisely.
Established in 1975, this art centre has a rich history of showing
experimental art for over thirty years and a revived interest in its
programming now. Archival documentation exploring this legacy from the
late 70s and early 80s will be presented. These practices provide an
interesting comparison to the vernacular used by artists to think
through ideas of agency, singularity and political empowerment today.
A complex and fascinating mathematics of the everyday, The Knowledge
involves learning 320 routes or runs mapped within a six-mile radius of
Charing Cross. Traveling approximately 26,000 miles across the city on
Honda C90′s, knowledge students memorize a total of 30,000 streets.
Calling over entails that after the completion of the days run[s],
calling over as an ongoing process of repetition, memorization,
rehearsal and navigation, articulated in a networked and non
heirarchical manner.

The Great Learning was a score
in seven paragraphs, rooted in and acoustically generated by the
Confucian text of the same name. Playing on the title of the great
learning as it relates to The Knowledge and its own system of learning,
and borrowing from the methodology, structure and political intent of
Cardews score, Gibson and McCarthy have used both aural and non aural
research into the knowledge as the generative principle behind
composition. The score for ‘if the route’ provides the basis for both
realization of live performance and the radio works.

Mirroring the seven paragraphs of Cardews score, the radio piece
comprises seven parts and takes place over seven weeks. In keeping with
the spirit of Cardew and the political gesture of experimental
composition in general, seven practitioners from varying fields and
disciplines have been commissioned by Gibson and McCarthy to use and
translate the score for radio according to their own personal and
varying interpretations.In Kerlin’s private viewing room, Byrne has built a full-scale section
of a wooden roller coaster. The tracks cut through the space as though
looping through the floor and re-emerging, before cutting through the
back wall and disappearing off into the city. It offers a heady and
vertiginous way out of the gallery, a kind-of nerve-racking adventure.

Rhona Byrne makes objects; site-specific, gallery and context-based
installations; films; publications and collaborative event-based
projects. These projects focus on the interplay between people and their
surrounding environment at both macro and micro levels. Byrne’s work
explores and engages with the multilayered surfaces and workings of the
built environment and navigates intangible and transient layers of
He began his career as an architectural
psychologist in the early 1960s and has published widely on varied
aspects of psychology and is best known for his theory of the Psychology
of Place.

Although both of these artists explore the traditions of drawing and
painting in highly individual and very distinctive manners, it can be
said that both bodies of work display an undeniable ability to
investigate shape and form whilst demonstrating an intense love of the
chosen medium and its possibilities for illusion, complexity, intricacy,
With the systematic
pursuance of this approach and the concentrated addition of
abstract-constructivist, conceptual and minimalist positions through to
the present, the DaimlerChrysler Collection has been given a clearly
defined profile which is well founded in art history terms.Arp, Vordemberge-Gildewart and Vantongerloo. In the group of
constructivist and concrete art, we have integrated recent works by
Reyle, Rockenschaub, Hiepler, Gillick and Monk, which can be related in
different ways to the formal vocabulary and analytical pictorial
concepts of the classical artists.In relation to the notion of stardom, the exhibition Gee how glamorous
offers exemplary representations of the central production mechanisms
and strategies employed by Warhol in his life and art, as well as in the
complex universe of the Factory. During the past decades there have been
innumerable thematic shows of Warhols work, yet most of them offered
classical interpretations by focussing on particular themes and/or group
of works within his oeuvre. Gee how glamorous proposes a different view
of Warhols work from a contemporary perspective. It seeks to posit
questions of identity and its construction, self-perception and the
perception of others in relation to theatrical as well as documentary
strategies. Beyond paintings, films and photographs by Andy Warhol, the
exhibition also presents a variety of documentary photos, archive
material and recordings from Warhols immediate surroundings. The overall
presentation consciously doing almost entirely without origin! All works
by Andy Warhol furthermore investigates the value and aura of the original.
and a love of detail. In his embroideries nostalgic memory and a
distanced, removed stance are forced into a critical reciprocal
interrelationship.

Vezzolis exhibition in Leipzig was planned in conscious view of the
concurrent show Geehow glamorous Andy Warhol: Stardom and Theatricality,
and presents embroidered portraits of stars that refer explicitly or
more generally to Warhols world. For Vezzoli, Warhol, with his almost
obsessive fascination for stardom and glamour, is prototypic of a means
of dealing with and instrumenting a star myth. Vezzoli realised a series
of portraits especially for this exhibition in collaboration with New
York star photographer Francesco Scavullo.than multiple-wall courts, easier to play on, and more accommodating of
spectators, one-wall handball courts continue to provide a free and
democratic venue for summer sports in the city.

–A *ball-making workshop*, in which participants will learn how to make
balls according to pre-industrial methods, utilizing old sheets, liquid
latex, vinegar, medical tape, punctured bicycle inner tubes, packing
materials, rubber bands, wine corks, bits of string, and other unlikely
stuff. Materials will be provided, but participants are also welcome to
bring old t-shirts, rubber doodads, yarn, and socks missing their mates.

This event is the 27th installment of “Hitting Walls/,”/ an iterative
project started by Wing in 2008 that consists of works made in a variety
of media and forms—large-format photographs, appropriated internet
material, experimental videos, sound sculptures, installations,
performances, participatory events, and written texts. All of the works
engage ball-wall sports, tracing new arcs through their long, globalized
histories and advocating embodied, material ways of describing the world
through bounce, rebound, and ricochet.

/How I Finally Accepted Fate/

EFA Gallery continues its inaugural season into the summer with /How I
Finally Accepted Fate/ curated by Jason Murison. In a two-part framework
of diary and fiction, /How I Finally Accepted Fate/ examines objects and
images which function through memoir.

The first half of the exhibition presents artists who use aspects of
diary as the conceptual foundation of their work. Many of these artworks
start with an extremely personal experience or relationship and distance
themselves through a project-oriented approach. For example, Matt
Keegans abstracted photographic installations always start from a
personal perspective, often using his boyfriend or his father as his
subject. Jennifer Cohen also utilizes her own history, as a professional
ballerina, to inform her sculptures that explore the quasi-cultural
history of the ballet. In both cases, the use of memoir becomes a
necessary springboard for larger conceptual structures; while other
works in the exhibition memoir remains intact.installation of drawings is the fodder for her powerful lecture
performances that combine the aspect of diary as travel log. In it she
tells a tale of grief set within the shifting and often violent
landscape that surrounds her.
/How I Finally Accepted Fate/ celebrates artworks whose fictional
scenarios and personal memoirs do not quite transcend the political, but
rather, hover as artifacts of change.

The gallery supports the creative work of independent
curators. Curators build the frame work in which we understand artists
and the art they make. At their best, they redefine how we look at culture.

The Elizabeth Foundation for the Arts believes in the essential
importance of art in a civil society. The value of the artist’s creative
spirit is not limited by age, race, nationality or acceptance by others.

Thirteen internationally renowned artists have travelled to the
countryside to find inspiration as they remember their childhood and
reflect on the nature of being a child today. They have created their
works specifically for Gross Leuthen Castle, which during and after the
Second World War served as an orphanage and has thus for over a half
century been witness to hundreds of experiences, childrens dreams and
childrens fates. Very different from one another, the rooms of the
castle mirror the conglomerate of styles that characterise the whole
structure. Their spellbinding diversity has served both as a challenge
and inspiration to the participating artists.

The works of art showcased in the Rohkunstbau XII exhibition reflect the
history of the building as well as the individual memories of the
artists. Above and beyond that, they highlight current issues
surrounding childhood in our aging society. Rohkunstbau XII is a trip
down memory lanea journey which is rewritten each time it is taken,
always revealing its relationship to the here and now in new and
unexpected ways.
childlike impressions, joys and fears, as well as the mechanisms of memory.

The exhibition includes two autonomous original projects that are
presented for the first time worldwide in Athens. In the specific
projects of the two artists, the well known Cypriot singer Alexia
collaborates and participates multi-dimensionally (composition, singing,
and acting). The exhibition is curated by the art theorist Dr. Sania Papa.

Joseph Dadoune and Anisa Ashkar invited Alexia to collaborate on
multiple levels in their two new autonomous works, aiming at the
creative collaboration between three artists coming from countries with
similar sociopolitical characteristics, traditions and cultural qualities.

In this project the
artist invited Alexia in a conversation-action that combines fragmented
speech, singing, movement and improvisation, elements that cause new
“abstractive” situations in a shifted “other” space-time, with an
interactive catalytic character of the release of primal characteristics
and behaviors. The work records the triadic projective relationship of
intellectual, natural and architectural space of the individual
(individual space, emotional space, work space, space of the Museum),
the white internal room (white cube) in relation to the space of the
dictator/master.

Joseph Dadoune, through a “laborious” and long-lasting creative process
of the treatment of film (change of color from colored to black and
white, chronological shift of actions, interruption of linear narration,
expulsion of concrete elements of natural architectural space, and
utilization of special effects), presents the analytic conceptual
dimension of created cinematographic reality (the film is based on the
interjection of the three basic colors white, black, and red): the
liberating nature of the natural and intellectual light against the
terror of repetitive confinement that intervenes redemptively in a
space-time without beginning or end (the viewer may watch the film
without a time sequence).
A ruin is defined as the disjunctive product of the intrusion of nature
into an edifice without loss of the unity produced by the human
builders. Time, proposed as the principal cause of ruin, serves also to
unify the ruin. In a ruin the edifice, the man-made part, and nature are
one and inseparable; an edifice separated from its natural setting is no
longer part of a ruin since it has lost its time, space and place. A
ruin has a signification different from something merely man-made. It is
like no other work of art, and its time is unlike any other time.

A ruin is always over, in spite of the fact that it necessarily holds
fragments of history. Moreover, a ruin is not in front of us. Decay
evolves next to us, not to say with us. That’s the reason why we can say
that at the beginning, there is the ruin.

Modern times have transformed the way ruins and monuments are approached
and considered to the point where ruins became “contemporary ruins”,
closer to present than to past. “Contemporary ruins” are produced both
by the acceleration of time and the growing fascination with
deterioration. They test the very idea of a ruin within a system of
objects structured by the invention of permanency. Good ruins do not
illustrate or morally demonstrate this, but are able to re-reverse
logics of time from science fiction to archaeology, from peplum to
I-pod. Ruin lets off the very idea of theme because the ruin uses up any
theme.

As soon as you start looking around, you see ruins everywhere.

Did you ever feel like an old bag in front of a work of art?

This show offers you a group of hopeful ruins, displayed in a classical
nineteenth century aristocratic Dutch house.of damaged artworks, a mountain of freshly white sprayed earphones, the
Jason mask without a face, the black plexiglass mandala, the silver
animated survival cover, the suspended up bird, the
celebration-church-bordello, and many more. Once in /The Corridor of Who
Knows When/, some are arriving, others are leaving. If you expect
nostalgia, be assured that nostalgic images just reiterate an inherited
set of cultural expectations. These hopeful ruins might not fulfil that
promise.

A ruin definitely alludes to the dissociation of ubiquitous artworks,
lost in their photographic “entombed” time. Hopeful ruins resist their
representation by being fragmented and, like raw material, ever again
available. They point out the fragility of images, which are just thin
illusions, doomed to fail our expectations, doomed eventually to crumble.
This explores the question of taboos in our society, reflecting
on their meaning and nature in relation to the concepts of power,
defeat, democracy, sexuality, idealism and integration.

While in *TEMPTATIONS*, curated by Edi Muka and Gezim Qendro (Albania),
artists including Olafur Eliasson, Phil Collins and Pal Hollender
analyzed how taboos correlate with the idea of power and the temptation
to violate its confines, in the second episode, TO LOSE WITHOUT BEING A
LOSER, Roberto Pinto (Italy), invited artists such as Tania Bruguera,
Jota Castro, Maja Bajevic and Stefano Romano, to use their work to
reflect on the concept of defeat, not as incapacity to win, but rather
as alternative view of the world.
DEMOCRACIES, title of the third episode, curated by Zdenka Badovinac
(Slovenia), focused on parallel economies, exploring the different new
possibilities in the concept of democracy, through artworks and new
operations, such as permission to screen the film /THE TAKE/, a
documentary on the effects of globalization and their implications,
which the artist Apolonia Sustersic invited unemployed workers in
Albania to attend free.

The power of restructuring inherent in the process of deconstructing the
past, the curator believes, is enormous and irresistible and is seen
almost more as a taboo that should be resisted and one we should oppose.
*GO INSIDE*, emphasizing the connections between manifestations of the
present both with history and with local conditions, comprises
sculpture, installations, projections and sound projects.

Now being held for the third time, the Tirana Biennale, has not only
established itself as an international art event, but also plays a
significant role in the process of growth taking place in Albania, a
country that has intuited to what extent culture can represent a point
of departure, rather than one of arrival, in economic development.
In conjunction with its forthcoming issue’s theme section, /Cabinet/
magazine is inaugurating “The Accident,” a series of programs that will
examine how the “accidental event” has been understood in the
philosophical, cultural, and scientific imagination since early
modernity. Of little intellectual value until then because of its
apparently insignificant singularity, the accident has since the 17th
century been recast into an occurrence that raises fundamental questions
about the way the world is ordered.
issues but has actually provoked, and in court defended, them: concepts
such as intellectual property issues, file sharing, media literacy,
creative activism in a media-saturated multinational world, evolving
notions of art and ownership, and law in a digital age.

As the distinction between commerce and leisure is increasingly blurred,
public space has morphed into a structure that is semi-private,
semi-governmental and facilitates both commerce and entertainment. This
panel considers how sustainable designwith its emphasis on energy
conservation, efficiency, environmentally reflexive material
specification etc. has been deployed in contemporary public space through
developers initiatives and government subsidies, and to what ends.

A discussion on the contested terrain of open source culture online, and
how new models and practices offer innovative artistic and political
possibilities to some, and questionable author- and ownership
complications to others. Panelists from different disciplines and
backgrounds will explore the effects of online platforms such as
Wikipedia and delicious on culture and offline systems of knowledge, as
well as current challenges to open source principles such as net
neutrality. Presented in collaboration with Rhizome.
 two themes.The transforming identity of Arab women is represented in Moroccan-born
*Lalla Essaydi*’s large-scale, calligraphic works, /*Les Femmes du
Maroc*/, showing at Anya Tish Gallery, March 7 – April 5, 2008.
www.anytishgallery.com <http://www.anytishgallery.com/>

Conceptual art referencing beauty and violence is featured by Sicardi
Gallery with new work by internationally known Colombian artist *Miguel
Angel Rojas*, March 27 – May 15, 2008. www.sicardigallery.com
<http://www.sicardigallery.com/>

Transformation of our environment is represented in /*Breaking Earth*/,
the collaboration of video artist *Alfred Guzzetti* and composer *Kurt
Calvert 22 presents …how is it towards the east? a month-long exhibition
and series of events which aim to make visible a body of research into
the histories, both personal and collective, of the Calvert 22 building
and surrounding area. Fostering conversations around how histories are
written and recorded in print and on screen, ...how is it towards the
east? critically examines modes of self-organisation and the traces of
Eastern European and Russian immigration in the East End.

The exhibition combines archival material and examples of historic
printed matter from émigré political agitators, alongside a rolling
programme of documentary films; as well as exhibited video works by Adam
Chodzko, Germano Facetti and Andrew Kötting.

Nada Prlja’s newly commissioned work /Subversion to Red/ takes the form
of a performative round-table discussion titled Red Discussion.The event
is conceived as a discussion between relevant thinkers and theorists who
have been invited to analyse and critique various concepts within
socialist / Marxist theory. The aim is to deconstruct former models
(those no longer relevant to current social and political structures)
and to propose aspects within them that may still be applicable today.
During the event, various ideas and key words will been written onto a
pentagonal table, which serves as a platform to build up and define a
set of concepts and ideals that could be used as a guide for redefining
contemporary society.
The fundamental idea behind this project is to follow up by now
legendary The Köln Show, a joint project by Cologne galleries, staged in
their showrooms in 1990, presenting until then undiscovered young
artists. On its way to establishing an up-to-date institution for
contemporary art in Cologne, European Kunsthalle revisits this historic
event in order to test the, at that time, highly successful model within
the framework of todays debates about decentralised exhibition concepts
and collaborative organisational structures. Against the background of
discussing possible operative and spatial models for a Kunsthalle,
Nicolaus Schafhausen, together with his team augmented by Florian
Waldvogel, focuses on the current relationship between cultural
Conceived of as a history and geography manual in the form of a game,
Latifa Echakhch often makes use of the spaces in which she is invited to
exhibit, finding clues to guide the production of a work specifically
related to the site. In /Eivissa/ (2010), for instance, the Spanish
playing cards used both in Spain and Morocco are seen from under pieces
of the concrete platforms built in Eivissa during the Spanish Civil War
to weigh down the tents of the Moroccans soldiers General Franco
enlisted in his rebel army. The proximity of the elements, spaces and
transaction rituals of two countries and cultures formulates a series of
dialectics between play and dogma, the shared and the imposed, as well
as between that which is understood to be fluid and transitory and that
which declares itself definitive, though equally subject to decline.

Fundamental to this artist’s contentious strategies are these sorts of
slippages of meanings, shifts from the conventions of semantics to those
of identity and back again, with all their attendant contradiction and
paradox. Similarly crucial are the physical displacements of certain
marks of identity into contexts or supports where they acquire one or
more new meanings or reveal unexpected characteristics that clash with
their original meaning (and where they suggest the Surrealist ‘found
object’ in all its riveting subversion). On the basis of Conceptual art,
Echakhch makes use of any language and technique available:
installation, video, sculptural objects, simple materials from everyday
life and happenings.
At the core of the works on display is a shared effort to provoke the
present by confronting the past. The work of the late Russian architect
Yakov Chernikov is a bold statement of resistance to the Stalinist
/The Snow Show 2006/, the third to be curated by Lance Fung, will be
presented prior to the opening of the XX Winter Olympic Games in Turin
in February 2006. The event will bring together six new collaborative
examples of snow-built cutting-edge contemporary art and architecture.
The teamed participants include Kiki Smith and Lebbeus Woods, Yoko Ono
and Arata Isozaki, Carsten Höller and Williams & Tsien, Daniel Buren and
Patrick Bouchain, Paola Pivi and Cliostraat, Jaume Plensa and Norman Foster.

Sestriere, in the Italian alps, has a unique topography that will allow
the six new projects to take advantage of the varied settings, providing
different levels for vantage and entrance points for each of the
projects. As the event coincides with the Winter Olympics, the
participants have taken into account the implications of sport and
incorporated it into their design, bringing architecture and
contemporary art to an international and mainstream audience of millions.

The Centro Cultural Montehermoso Kulturunea, in accordance with its
desire to support creation and research in contemporary art and thought,
announces a call for entries for a series of grants. The objective of
this initiative, which is promoted by the Vitoria-Gasteiz City Council,
is to facilitate the production of thirteen selected projects in the
following categories.*100 Artists See God* continues the ICA’s investigation into new
exhibition models that confront issues relevant to the wider concerns of
today’s world. In a time where major belief systems clash against each
other, often resulting in violent and tragic conflict, the ICA presents
this exhibition as a response to Western society’s seemingly
unquestionable belief in a rational understanding of the world. *100
Artists See God* proposes an open ended contemplation of highly complex
reveal idiosyncratic, unexpected viewpoints, the exhibition allows
viewers to formulate their own thoughts and concerns by simultaneously
revealing and questioning the place of God today and showing how issues
of spirituality thread their way through the entire fabric of
international culture.

Further mocking the structure of a private corporation, Cuevas rented an
office on the 14th floor of the tallest skyscraper in Mexico City. From
this local 1950s modernist icon, Cuevas designed a website that is part
of the “irational.org” group, which also has contributors in England and
Spain, (33) and set out to establish a whole range of products and
services to be given away for free on request and with no obligation to
reciprocate. MVC’s catalogue is a small compilation of contemporary
dreams and antidotes to frustration. Cuevas leaves random “magic” seeds
(very much in the tradition of Ben Vautier’s unlabelled cans of “mystery
food”) next to ATMs, suggesting to the customer an agrarian turn to make
of the former social structure of political clientelism and the
untenable dreams of world-class development. Despite its mocking of
corporate culture, and the radical and anarchist leanings of its
creator, one can credit MVC with having replicated the unconscious
structure of this fake version of the welfare state. Cuevas’s work, in
that sense, is a timely counter monument for a cunning postrevolutionary
populist regime that seems on the way to vanishing entirely, eroded by
the democratic struggles of its population and the unstoppable advance
of global capitalism.
Short-termism reigns. Today’s decisions lack a future horizon. A
constant flood of snapshots feeds the fear of missing out. A
never-ending flood of new technologies promises to solve all our
problems—until the next revelation of the impossibility of tackling
deep-seated conflicts through technological management. 

The international soloist ensemble *zeitkratzer* from Berlin examines
Compostela is an exhibition which has been organized around ten
individual projects by artists who share their use of photography and
video, as well as a remarkable interest for the reflection on everyday
issues and references to natural and human landscape, urban
architectures, monuments or peripheral neighborhoods, but also to
aspects, which are more difficult to symbolize, like the physiognomy –
spiritual, sentimental and mood-related- of a city or even the human
landscape. More than a collective exhibition on the city, Compostela is
a series of entwined projects, which try to compete with and to show the
present of the town.

more complex vision of the identity of this town through the approaches
of several of the most acknowledged artists of the contemporary art scene.
Gabriele Basilico (Milan, Italia, 1944) Fuoricentro. From the standpoint
of a specialized tourist who goes beyond the monumental heritage,
Gabriele Basilico proposes a detained look at the territory structured
around three axes, which create peripheral urban nuclei. He did not need
a lot of time to get familiar with the area through which the town
grows, which he visited by car, a means of transport we all use when we
live outside the town center. He stems from this idea to portray, rather
than the buildings-objects, the consequences of our present lifestyle,
when living is less dwelling and more moving between limits.
painting, video, performance and installation. The subjects and issues
addressed by the artists are varied and range from a formal discussion
on the nature of the still life in painting, to poignant statements
about violence in Latin America, to investigations on the nature of
language, knowledge and history. A shared element found in the projects
is an experimental, investigative, praxis: a discursive process whereby
each artist attempts to arrive at definitions to question, but not
necessarily to fully answer, complex layers of meaning found in everyday
life.
and moving beyond the traditional paradigms and stereotypes associated
with art from Latin America, explained cifos Director Cecilia
Fajardo-Hill. Through its *Grants and Commissions Programs*, cifohas set
forth the goals of assisting artists produce work that may lie outside
commercial viability and providing artists with a unique platform to
present projects that engage local and international audiences alike.
*cifo*, the Cisneros Fontanals Art Foundation, is a non-profit
organization, established in 2002 by Ella Fontanals-Cisneros and her
family to foster cultural and educational exchange within the visual
arts.Emilia Azcárate creates a large-scale sculptural installation by weaving
and interconnecting black hairpins. In this piece, a mundane objecta
black hairpinis transformed, alluding to circular structures such as
/mandalas/ and womens hair, both subjects which fascinate the artist.
Seen from up close, the sculpture (Untitled) possesses a delicate
quality. When beheld from a distance the piece achieves the opposite
effect, becoming imposing and fence-like.
Alessandro Balteos /UNstabile-Mobile/ interconnects the histories of
art, power, and politics in an installation that comprises a visual
component of texts and images appropriated from varied sources, and the
construction of a sculptural piece. Balteo translates the organic
formation of oilfields by constructing an unstable sculpture. The
sculpture, influenced by the work of Alexander Calder, becomes a visual
metaphor for the instability of the region.

In the project, /Estas Ruinas que ves/, Mariana Castillo Deball examines
Mexicos complex relationship with its past through her documentary
investigation of contemporary archeological practices. /Estas Ruinas que
ves/ examines the context of archaeology and the life of archeological
artifacts, exploring how they are presented and animated in varied
contexts, and how they are interpreted and defined. Her installation
consists of three components: an archive displaying her photography, a
museum setting devoid of objects, and a publication that ties all these
elements together.
Consisting of two separate publications: one in English and the other in
Spanish, /Translated Catalogue and // y Catálogo traducido examines the
intricacies of art and the subject of translation. The artist Carla
Zaccagnini creates publications that are works of art in-and-of
themselvesblurring the line between visual arts and literatureas they
contain images of artwork and essays relating to the images themselves.
These catalogues are distributed to the audience in order to establish a
more intimate, prolonged experience with the work.
The Holy Artwork

HAMMER ORANGES APPLE

with a text by Paul McCarthy (deutsch/english);

Basement and other places, inside and outside

Boxes separated by an arched doorway

Original becomes dead stand in, not worth much

Metaphor for here today, gone tomorrow

Documentation of the dead, a pure act of null and void

Boxes as skulls

The original thought, now dead

MATHILDE TER HEJNE

TRAGEDY


For a long time already, the two Polish artists, Pawel Althamer and
Artur Zmijewski, planned a joint project which they have finally been
able to realize in the Dusseldorf Kunstverein. This project was done in
collaboration with the Foundation Foksal Gallery in Warsaw. As he has in
his former works, Artur Zmijewski takes the position of an observer
working in the field of behavioral research who provokes and studies
unusual situations. Four short portrait films show Althamer in different
states; the artist is a medium, mediating the intensity of his
experiences or sensual perceptions. The artist’s consciousness, extended
through travelling, hypnosis and drugs, opens up a different, “alien”
view on our direct surroundings. Banal situations are the starting point
The motifs of Heike Baranowsky’s video pieces are taken from everyday
life – a swimmer, a cyclists, a zeppelin or grass – and that’s why they
seem familiar to the viewer at first sight. Through cuts and loops,
however, one’s perception is disturbed after watching the videos for
awhile: the swimmer never takes a breath, the cyclists don’t overtake
one another even though they travel at different speeds.

If you can’t see anything, you still see something ... impenetrable fog,
heavy clouds, whirled up dust – white noise as an aesthetic and visual
phenomena, examined and archived through a broad collection of found images.
The Histrionic’s line-up of vocals, guitar, bass and drums is modeled on
the Australian ‘cover band’ stereotype and sets out to demonstrate how
second-hand mediation of international art in Australia can be a
productive experience. For this CD, the Histrionics have grafted new
lyrics onto faithful renditions of familiar rock/pop classics. Part
critical, part ironic, these texts examine serious theoretical issues
gripping the visual art world and field of culture at large. These
upbeat pop renderings wade through murky political waters, dripping in
controversy, innuendo and rumor.
Florian Pumhosl refers to moments of early abstract and documentary
image production. He not only transfers their technical and aesthetic
aspects into the 21st century, but also transmits the contents of
manifestos which came up together with the production of a modern
picture language. Abstract films mark an important point within his
exhibition. Like no other work of art they give proof of the
fundamentally changed concept of the single image and the reproduction
of reality.

Marina Warner explores *Maya Derens* oeuvre and examines how she managed
the profound affinity between the material properties of film and inner
states of mind.

The Brazilian artist Hélio Oiticica is best known for his coloured
boxes, architectural constructions and the wearable caps inspired by his
time in Rio’s Mangueira /favela/. Tate Modern’s exhibition provides an
opportunity to explore this mercurial artist during the crucial years
when he transformed himself from the precocious Neo-Constructivist
acolyte of the 1950s into the revolutionary barrier-smasher of the
1960s.You realise how water never loses its identity, it is always discretely
itself. Water is transparence derived from the presence of everything.
Roni Horn ruminates on how water is central to her work in conversation
with *Bice Curiger*.
New York– *Scope* hunts down that most endangered of species: the
emerging artist. Both moving target and elusive chameleon, *Scope*s 80
participants capture this exotic breed in their roving crosshairs.
Challenging passive viewing with 30,000 square feet of open-range,
*Scope* New York exposes visitors to a real-time survey of the
contemporary art world available nowhere else.
performance and exhibitions, an experimental music series, an online
radio station and distribution label, and education initiative, and an
artist residency program and study center.
Under the stewardship of David Hunt and Franklin Sirmans, a consortium
of independent curators will pass the curatorial baton, only to square
off moments later in a bare-knuckle showdown. The anchorman becomes the
lead-off man becomes the man who knew too much. Rolodexes are purged as
relationship-arbitrage witnesses heavy trading. Including:

PAM creates a dynamic sensory environment
that allows the artist and the viewer to participate in the curatorial
process both at Scope New York and on the web at
www.perpetualartmachine.com <http://www.perpetualartmachine.com/>.
performers stand opposite each other–their hands are on each others
shoulders as they awkwardly navigate into the social greeting of a
distant air kiss. Just when the sexual tension between the two becomes
unbearable, the performers slowly reverse the sequence of their previous
gestures until they are air kissing once more.
Craft Restaurants Chef Tom Collichios hip and award-winning sandwich
bistro. wichcraft uses top-quality ingredients often from small,
artisinal producers and professional cooking techniques to create a
superior handheld meal. Served daily throughout the fair.
Relax on Stark furniture from Kartell.
renovated to become a new Center for Contemporary Art. 

“The building where the Fondazione’s programme has evolved has its roots
deep in the industrial heart of the city. A place made of walls,
divisions and memories that offered the challenge for a confrontation
with oneself, with one’s ability and willingness to cross the barriers,
physically, conceptually and politically, calling oneself into question
to overcome the logic of distance and separation. The multiplicity of
points of view has made it possible not only to seek to look for answers
but above all to recognise the uncertainties. Artists are experts in
accelerating the important issues that arise from being human. They
strip down culture to make it appear as it really is.” 
–Beatrice Merz
initiating new curatorial practices by inviting the audience to act and
react; combining knowledge and sensory experiments; anticipating and
explaining social, ecological, and philosophical changes…
through the use of a remarkably broad variety of reproducible media, ranging from sound, video, photographs and slide projections to prints, silkscreens and tapestries.

ALBUM/TRACKS B may refer to a photo album which, empty at first, tells a “(hi)story” only once it is filled with pictures, a story to look at, read, and interpret from ever new points of view. The work of Ana Torfs (born in 1963, lives in Brussels) could also be understood as a tribute to certain personalities and events from history, literature, and film whose tracks— hence the title—and traces the artist pursues and endows with new life.
development to the sewing machine—and of formal and informal use. The
flag serves as a vehicle for political-identical argumentation; but it
should also be considered in its materiality—as hardware. 

could conclude from this is that if we can speak of the art of the world
fair in terms of propaganda—keeping the Venice Biennale in mind as our
starting point—we should do so not from the superstructural role of the
artwork itself, which serves mainly as a decorative function of ideals
of civilization and innovation, but in relation to the underlying
uncontested base that facilitates this exchange of goods. A further,
more interesting conclusion could be drawn relating the United Arab
Emirates to the doctrine of democratism, a political construct that
dispenses actual electoral, parliamentary representation. 

he
“unbounded world” does not pertain to some return to “nature,” but is
the effect of a particular institutional regime that regards any limit
as potentially already outmoded. Far removed from the model of a central
power directly controlling subjects, the performance/pleasure apparatus
is apportioned into diversified mechanisms of control, evaluation, and
incentivization and pertains to all the cogs of production, all modes of
consumption, and all forms of social relations.
One common explanation for why intellectual property makes no sense in
an era of file-sharing uses the example of what happens when you copy a
file on a computer. Copy-Paste: a second file has been produced, but the
original is unaltered. Now it has a sibling, a partner, a twin. And if
they keep reproducing themselves in this way, no problem. Which is to
say that, at least in the digital domain, the entire calculus of
scarcity is very different from the material domain. The difference
between a single entity, two entities, or a billion is almost nil. Under
these circumstances, as the argument goes, reintroducing laws of
scarcity by limiting access is simply backward.

But this is not to say that people go unaltered by this kind of
proliferation. And it is definitely not to say that scarcity goes away
and all people become wealthy just because we can get our hands on lots
and lots of computer files. No, it’s just to say that the nature of what
we consider a resource has been profoundly redistributed across domains
of knowledge and whatever its material base has become. Original and
counterfeit mutually melt. Some things can be reproduced ad nauseam
while others simply decay. It is where the simulacrum is no longer
deceptive in its distance from the real but just really confusing when
it comes to trying to locate actual resources.

To be more precise, it is forcing such a high level of abstraction that
productive and reproductive forces become indistinguishable from each
other. In a response in this issue to the “Manifesto for Accelerationist
Politics,” Antonio Negri identifies this particular level of abstraction
as the place that must be occupied. Cognitive labor is already abstract,
and it is under the auspices of this abstraction that its output is left
by the roadside to be swept up by capital and taken elsewhere.
Strangely, we are faced with a scenario in which not only the Left, but
also capitalism suffers from retrograde approaches to technology. And
yet, as the relation of the human to technology is being rewritten
seemingly on its own, the urgent task becomes one of locating the places
where the most crucial abstract and immaterial effects register
themselves in life. It is a question of form.

The artist Mary Walling Blackburn has pointed out that it becomes very
interesting to think about overpopulation in this scenario. She was
actually pregnant at the time. Overpopulation implies a capacity that
has reached its limit, a bloat that is taxing resources. But what is it
that is being overpopulated, and how is the capacity reached? Let’s try
to look at it differently—by way of the family. The family is the place
where public and private mash together. It is the interface of both. It
is a shelter from society. It forges subjectivity, for better or for
worse. It is universal even if it doesn’t assume a singular form. The


But a form of care that is bountiful and not subject to any measurement
is also not infinite. It may be absolute in its commitment, but it is
not infinite in its capacity. If we look at what is happening to family
relations at the moment, we may start to see the place where the

*With all due respect to those who still comically believe that
revolutionary possibilities must be linked to the revival of the working
class of the twentieth century, such a potentiality clarifies that we
are still dealing with a class, but a different one, and one endowed
with a higher power. It is the class of cognitive labor. This is the
class to liberate, this is the class that has to free itself.


*The meaning was equally clear or unclear regardless of whether it was a
conscious work or not. I no longer saw the difference in principle
between the egg cup arrangement, the cauliflower, and the remote control.


*Certain statements do not have practical traction in the world. Why
don’t we think that removing social welfare is a form of state killing?
Especially when the neoliberal state says that its way of “caring” will
make life unviable for many. “Life is going to get much worse,” we are
told, “but just wait and then things will get better.” Why do we think
of this as care and not as state abuse? How long are we willing to give
late-liberal forms of care-as-enervation before we are willing to call
them a form of killing?


*Inhumanism is exactly the activation of the revisionary program of
reason against the self-portrait of humanity. Once the structure and the
function of commitment are genuinely understood, we see that a
commitment works its way back from the future, from the collateral
commitments of one’s current commitment, like a corrosive revisionary
acid that rushes backward in time. By eroding the anchoring link between
present commitments and their past, and by seeing present commitments
from the perspective of their ramifications, revision forces the
updating of present commitments in a cascading fashion that spreads
globally over the entire system.

*Love is in this sense not an elevated romantic phenomenon but the
economization of empathy. Love is immaterial capital in the absolute in
a sphere of value relations where capital and labor are no longer the
main operators or arbiters of value. As unfixed capital summons higher
and higher symbolic registers into the arena of exchange, its increasing
abstraction puts it constantly on the prowl for a lower base to peg
value to.

*For the majority of young girls and boys, this is their first encounter
with an art space. They are totally lost. They have no idea what to
expect. They are trembling. How this initiation happens is extremely
important, so we really try to work hard on it. Courage is important,
having the courage to tremble.

and also the weird stuff. Sex as the symbolic drainage area for desires
that exceed and escape the society, but also as the visceral pelvic
thrust behind those desires that glue the whole contraption together
when it is actually hopelessly falling apart. Because we all know the
fear of sex, and most of us have spent too much time close to a military
or imperial or populist regime bent on regulating or functionalizing it.
Keep it minimal, because this kind of intimacy mashes subject and object
relations together in a way that makes governance confusing if not
impossible.

In order to stabilize power, it is absolutely necessary to keep sex
cordoned off and in its place because of how it switches and mutually
erases notions of emancipation and enslavement, which is after all why
sexual practices and codes can be such a terrifyingly direct line to how
deeply emancipation and enslavement have been inscribed into the most
minute practices of a person. Just on the level of muscle movements, you
can detect an emancipated citizen lapsing into the most severe or
infantile brutality, and the most repressed can freely express all the
tenderness that is usually systematically foreclosed in every other part
of the day or in every other part of the city. Sex is where classes
switch roles just for kicks and gender can forget itself. In it, you can
only be a conduit for codes of submission and domination that were
written into your being at some point by history, ancestry, upbringing,
star sign—and even though you can never change the fact that you will
always be a macho entitled fuckhead or a generous submissive who stores
all that hardship on a remote server, you can rewrite yourself through
role play with another person.
since sexuality can never be absent from any society, sexuality is
always at least latently embedded in any society as the potential for
freedom—freedom from prejudices, power, control, and so forth. However,
judging by statistical data, the rate of sexual intercourse under
socialism may have been even higher than under capitalism.

The artist rejects any attempt to give this drift toward anarchy and
chaos any definite direction, to let it culminate in any new order.
Socialism collapses. Capitalism triumphs. But the process of entropy
goes on. Stilinović now demystifies money as he had earlier demystified
party language. After all, money is also merely images, signs among
other signs.

On the cover, Gotovac superimposed a shot of himself holding open his
trench coat—a glowing five-pointed star cut out of his forehead—over the
letters T-O-M. His exposed penis dangles neatly below the Glen Miller
T-shirt he is wearing. This Tom character—a cinephile punk—is joined by
three other portraits inside the paper: Tom the security agency worker,
Tom the pinup, and Tom the superhero. They all pay homage to the absurd
adventures of a country facing its brutal fall, while still enjoying the
last convulsions of socialism.

In 2014, we’re torn between the seductive aspect of coming together and
the fear that we are consciously producing evidence that will be used
against us. Let’s move away from the binary logic of online/offline, of
participation/exodus, and instead design other forms of social
interaction and organization together, based on sustainable exchanges,
strong ties, and a sensual imagination that allows us to transcend the
given cultural formats (from edu-factory formats to Facebook).

Repetition in architecture today, as in every other cultural sphere,
attests to the historical impasse at which society has lingered for
almost a century. Architects find themselves forced to recycle, reorder,
and repeat novelties of the past in order to remain “cutting-edge” in
the present. No longer does the steady march of technological progress
provide a path for architecture to follow. 
If, like me, you have experienced telepathic reception, then you know
that you can never trust telepathic signals, because telepathic signals
are always accompanied by something else. They are always accompanied by
telepathic noise.

Absent the awareness of the different levels of analysis at work in
political economy, “capitalism” inevitably elevates distinct and
conflicting relations within and between the modes of consumption,
circulation, production, and distribution, confusing them with an
overwhelming para-natural force: the creation of surplus value, or what
I have called “alchemy.” The result is that, in one way or another,
every “capitalism” is always already a spiritualism, a mystification
that places the actual levers of collective emancipation out of reach.


Kester’s text leaves more troubling questions unaddressed: Who can “see”
shifts in power? Just as you cannot “see,” or for that matter witness,
the workings (and embedded hierarchies) of a right, as Brown’s work so
adeptly lays out, I would argue that attempting a diachronic analysis,
as Kester calls for, must start with how the project articulates its own
demands.
them further, and hands them to you as they are. No one is trying to
nationalize your desires into any kind of heroic totalitarian mythos.
This is no small feat, considering that it is typical for people who
fear for their safety and survival to seek out symbolic forms of
belonging and togetherness that appear to stabilize their families and
communities. People begin to ask for the nation, the race, the creed,
the sectarian, the rooted, the indigenous. The old greatness must be
restored. Sentimental resources are called in to keep the community
together when material resources fall short.

What is clear in these new origin myths is that the nation as a
functional structure is less and less of an actor, regressing either to
a role as manager and regulator of a market economy, or as a fragmentary
or backward fossil playing host to corruption and opportunism. Even
today’s most unapologetically authoritarian states are little more than
an umbrella for the whims of an inner circle of rulers. But when faced
with the question of what a state should or could be, and what its
responsibilities are, we simply don’t care. And yet we have to admit
that when the idea of a nation breaks off from the structural base of
the state, things start to get extremely weird. The nation starts to
morph into a floating signifier for all manner of original
communities—and can be used by original and synthetic communities alike
to recompose and assemble a myth of togetherness for whatever end they
please.

Whatever is causing this to happen in so many places, it appears that
fewer people are immune to its effects—in spite of education, class, and
wealth—that it moves in many directions simultaneously. For artists and
artworks this poses a problem of representation whereby a reinvigorated
need to explore cultural origins will not assume any fixed or easily
discernible form familiar to traditional authoritarian declarations.
Rather, it will seize upon artists’ own lives and priorities, infusing
the content of their work with sentimental origin quests, and it will
inflect the decisions made by collectors, acquisition departments, and
curators. It will accent the way an artist situates his or her work in
relation to the world, and to other places in the world where these
works may circulate. Everything might look like business as usual when a
massive gravitational shift builds itself firmly into already existing
lines of thought in artistic discourse, with contextual specificity and
cultural sensitivity ascending from artistic strategies or signs of
curatorial good faith to become dominant criteria and battleground sites
of proxy wars waged in museum auditoriums. A responsible artist might
consider carrying small arms to the opening in case anyone has a problem
with large-format C-prints of landscapes from a certain corner in that
dark cavernous place where you should not go.

And yet some artists who might appear to be moving back to their
mythical home to purify themselves might at the same time be permanently
purging themselves of the lure of origin. In the cycles of decomposition
and recomposition, others might push instead for the granting of
statehood to synthetic subcultural milieux which for some reason attain
a legitimate status alongside more historically situated tribes and
peoples. A promised land of gamers and alcoholics, for instance. A
continent for indebted MFAs, rich in coltan deposits and with its own
stock market harvesting bitcoin. Finally, a place gay Bolsheviks can
call their own.

The scale of conspiratorial thinking in Russia is now comparable to that
of the US after 9/11.* *But the problem with conspiracy theories is not
the fact that they are false products of a paranoiac imagination, but
rather that some conspiracies /do/ exist. To reject this means to turn a
blind eye to one of the many important tools of world politics. It thus
seems crucial to avoid a simplistic opposition between middlebrow
paranoiac thinking, and apparently enlightened reason unaware of its own
blind spots.

I still do not know exactly what to do about this incredibly beautiful
image of a rainforest installed at the core of an art institution. It
embodies all the difference in the world, separated from human agency
and ideology, yet it also encapsulates the source of all that. It
differs from the conventions of neutrality, and through its scale and
its very nature it escapes from any formal canons. It compels a form of
intelligence without consciousness to erupt into the white cube. 


If one looks
more closely, it is easy to see that both liberal and
Putinist-conservative understandings of the analogy between contemporary
Russia and the USSR are mirror images of each other.
*I’m not a strong believer in art departments or art schools. Maybe
Emory’s example is a good moment to examine their relevance. It’s not
clear yet if Emory’s decision foreshadows the future of academia in the
US, or if it’s just a passing fad. Either way, these developments at
Emory raise crucial questions: What function do art schools fulfill? Do
we really need them? 

NEO-MODERNISM*
Modernism’s not over yet, but continues to inspire a younger generation
of artists. And they revere *Imi Knoebel*—whose exhibition /ICH NICHT /
ENDUROS/ is currently on view at the *Deutsche Guggenheim*. db artmag on
the return to the avant-garde of the past.

In the summer of 1989, Francis Fukuyama published his infamous essay
declaring the global triumph of free-market liberal democracy over
communism as the end of ideology as such. Not only that, but he also
claimed the world was on the cusp of realizing what Fukuyama’s mentor
Alexandre Kojève called the “universal homogenous state,” which would be
the climax of a particular Western idealist tradition stretching back to
Hegel. It would be the endpoint of a human consciousness based in
accumulative historical progress that also grounded the thinking of Marx
himself, who pegged his own philosophy to a conception of time and human
advancement as a constant moving towards a projected endpoint. But
seriously, regardless of whether this endpoint has been reached, how
advanced do you really feel? How many artworks have you seen in recent
years that even struck you as being relevant as art? And the insane
proliferation of regressive ultranationalist and ethnic or sectarian
violence hardly points to historical progress either. This phenomenon is
spreading nearly everywhere, from the EU parliament elections, to India,
Iraq, Hungary, Russia, Japan, and so forth. The list is endless.

Since Fukuyama wrote his essay, he has been considered primarily a
free-market ideologist seizing an early chance to declare the
dismantling of the Soviet Union as the definitive moral victory of
Western capitalist democracy—a kind of master ideology to end all
ideologies. But those who once disregarded him should now look more
closely at his essay, because it is absolutely prophetic. Of course,
Fukuyama was not only writing as an intellectual, but also as a senior
policymaker at the US State Department and a former analyst at the RAND
Corporation. And while his essay did not officially reflect the views of
the American state, it was nevertheless written by a man who was not
only close to power, but also possessed the means to implement his
declarations. So if it comes across as prophetic, it wouldn’t be a
coincidence. The essay now reads as a crystal-clear blueprint for a
peculiarly murky apolitical nonideological condition that has proven to
be incredibly difficult to work from—particularly for artists.

And yet what rescues Fukuyama’s intellectual integrity from those who
prefer to set him up as a free-market huckster is how he so beautifully
expresses reservations about the very posthistorical condition he
professes. He closes the essay by writing:

History is coming back, but not in the way we understood it in the
idealist tradition. If Kojève’s universal homogenous state (which is
probably also the EU) is characterized by unbearable boredom and
stagnation, it starts to make sense that the only political horizon
available to not only the wishy-washy centrists of electoral
democracies, but also to the uprisings and Occupy movements of recent
years, was liberal democracy in its present form. And yet we are
increasingly bumping up against the utter failure of liberal democracy
to account for the bankers and corrupt regimes who commit their worst
crimes from within the logic of economic freedom and electoral
democracy. So even as we feel the people around us becoming more
comfortable making racist remarks, we also start to sense our political
consciousness shifting, because it seems clear that the consolidation of
free-market democracy is starting to buckle completely. It might be that
we are only now seeing how it was a Ponzi scheme all along. History is
not beginning again, because it never really ended. Rather, the idea of
a homogenous system built on idealism has become unsustainable and has
given way to the many identitarian battles that it has had to suppress
in order to keep itself going. Only the end of history is ending.

Kojève proclaimed that art would disappear in the universal homogenous
state, and it probably did. No wonder funding is being pulled and
artists are concerned with strategic withdrawal—everyone is bored sick
of the waves of inflationary and depressive episodes of large-scale,
bombastic zombie exhibitions. And yet swaths of participating artists
pull out after realizing their works are being produced by a weapons
manufacturer or the security company managing internment camps. It seems
art does not end only because it has flowed into life, but also because
its conditions have become too contradictory to be contained any longer.
On the one hand, we might wonder whether a Sunni or Shia militia
commander would say something similar about the internal contradictions
of a puppet regime it seeks to topple. But, on the other hand, it is now
being reported that the Sunni Isis militia is partly financed by
antiquities taken from archeological digs in the crumbling state of

The end of the Cold War failed to bring about the end of history as the
liberal world order, and liberal democracies have failed to reign in the
excesses and instabilities of global capitalist markets and to rid the
new world order of primitive ideologies and political enmities. The
threats to “forms of life,” to the will to life, continue to exist.
Stateless people and groups are exceptionally vulnerable to
“disappearing.” There can be no effective movement for collective
self-preservation without the proper political determination.

Thus institutions end up filled with those who want nothing more than to
destroy them—the European Parliament a shell stuffed with people
shouting about how pointless it all is and how the whole thing should
just be abolished. It is consequently possible to imagine every existing
institution occupied by those who most want it abolished—prisons are
already such a place, or schools, perhaps—but the banks are not yet
filled with anticapitalists.

survival, and you can call it resistance. Small islands of temporary
social autonomy will resist, but the conditions for social solidarity
have been cancelled by the pervading precarity. We should stop deceiving
ourselves: the only resistance to global financial capitalism for the
time being is the identitarian force of localism, identity, and fascism.

I call this culture driven by nationalistic spectacles and the denial of
historical facts “pornographic fascism.” It is based on a dynamic of
revealing and hiding, of exhibitionism and denialism: revealing private
life (of the imperial family), one’s own dying body (in media
spectacle), and the graphic language of racism, while hiding the dirty
secrets of history. Pornographic fascism is driven by the desire to
perform martyrdom for the homogenized territory of the mass media.

*_Oxana Timofeeva—_*_*The End of the World: **From Apocalypse to the End
of History and Back*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-end-of-the-world-from-apocalypse-to-the-end-of-history-and-back>
What really eliminates differences is catastrophe: in the waters of the
Flood, everyone is equal. I am arguing not for a messianic, but a
catastrophic communism, i.e., the end of the world taken in its
real-time. In this time, the end of the end of history doesn’t mean that
we still have a future, and that it will get better or worse. It will
not get worse, it’s already worse. All of these phenomena that are
associated with reality and that are supposed to reemerge after the new
beginning of history—wars, repression, butchery, and so forth—are really
visions of our present zombie apocalypse.

*_Walid Raad—_*_*Appendix XVIII: Plates 22–257*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/appendix-xviii-plates-22-257/>**
It seems that when some colors, lines, shapes, and forms sense the
forthcoming danger, they somehow just leap, or jump, or drift, or
somehow “abandon” their present location to take refuge in certain
documents that circulate around artworks. They are no longer within
those artworks, but in documents that circulate around them.

*_Boris Groys—_*_*On Art Activism*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/on-art-activism/>
There is no doubt that we are living in a time of total
aestheticization. This fact is often interpreted as a sign that we have
reached a state after the end of history, or a state of total exhaustion
that makes any further historical action impossible. However, as I have
tried to show, the nexus between total aestheticization, the end of
history, and the exhaustion of vital energies is illusionary. Using the
lessons of modern and contemporary art, we are able to totally
aestheticize the world—i.e., to see it as being already a corpse—without
If the excess of ultranationalism demands that we stand whenever the
national anthem is played, or that we cheer in the loudest voice every
act of triumphant chest-beating, it may well be time for us to continue
sitting where we are precisely because we love the ground that we sit
on, and to do so quietly, since sedition sometimes speaks in whispers.

Anxieties about alertness, agency, hypnosis, and the nightmares of a
catatonic seizure of the popular will by “fascism” often rear their head
in the wake of sweeping victories for right-wing parties. Are we

Francis Fukuyama, and even his mentor Alexandre Kojève before him,
warned of boredom, stasis, and homogeneity being characteristics of the
“universal homogenous state” that would mark the end of history. As
Fukuyama put it: in the post-historical period there will be neither art
nor philosophy, just the perpetual caretaking of the museum of human
history. And indeed, the phase of contemporary art has also been
characterized in discussions over recent years as a reformatting of time
into a perpetual present. The contemporary is the now that never ends,
the art that circles itself at the tail end of history looking back on
defunct ideologies, archiving and polishing them for a future that never
arrives.

Something else also happened around the time of Fukuyama’s proclamation.
Because another side of the end of history might have to do not only
with the collapse of a certain notion of humanist progress but also with
a whole other shift in temporality that made it doubly unsustainable.
And it also took its structure from the liberal tradition as well as the
US military. It has to do with radical advances in communication
technologies that we also call the internet. In fact, Fukuyama’s mistake
may have been in seeing a global Pax Americana in traditional
geopolitical terms, when in fact the end of history is then not only the
end of a certain era of political thought but also the beginning of a
new phase of extreme spatial and temporal compression. It is marked by a
perpetual sense of dislocation that alters the way we experience places
and events, and by extension the way time and causality
function—certainly not in terms of any accumulative continuity that
would make historicization possible. Instead, everything happens as if
simultaneously, even contemporaneously. We thought Fukuyama was talking
about ideology, but it was also about how we stabilize an idea of one
thing following another in the most basic sense.

The only catch is that speed might already have become an outdated
notion. We thought we had to be moving fast in order to cover these long
distances, but it might just as well be that the world is shrinking, and
we are not in fact moving as fast or as far as we had thought. And we
are not so much at risk of fragmenting into a cosmopolitan mess, but of
actually being compacted. If space and time are actually compressing,
then something totally outside of our control would actually be
consolidating all of our fragmentary contradictions on its own until we
are completely resolved as a single thing. And this resolved state of
being might use the strong name of a nation, tribe, sect, religion, or
race to crowdsource votes or as a talisman to ward off further invasions
trying to beam in over YouTube or Skype. Some of us may be convinced by
not of the hopeful but of the concretely ordinary and pragmatically banal.

How does a life world already constitute a concrete money form? How do
we understand and expand permanent incommensurability as the primary
non-value of any form of social exchange? What figures does this produce
as factors and variables in those exchanges, what does it draw into its
vortex? Concentration, distraction, exhaustion, daydreaming, race,
suffering, severe pain?

and Elizabeth A. Povinelli. This short film forms the first of a
four-part meditation in this issue of /e-flux journal/ on the problem of
time, effort, and endurance in conditions of precarity.

_*Elizabeth A. Povinelli—**Holding Up the World, Part II: Time/Bank,
Effort/Embankments*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/holding-up-the-world-part-ii-timebank-effortembankments/>
In other words, those for whom no effort has been invested are then held
accountable for not having the conditions for making the right kind of
effort—the kind of effort that would eventuate a kind of event: the new,
amazing, world-transformative concept-activity. How do we think about
various explicitly aestheticized forms and genres of concept-activity
that at once analyze and make worlds in which these efforts of attentive
endurance are formed, thickened, and extended? And where and with whom?

**_Lauren Berlant and Elizabeth A. Povinelli_*_—_*_*Holding Up the

<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/holding-up-the-world-part-iii-in-the-event-of-precarity-%e2%80%a6-a-conversation-between-elizabeth-povinelli-and-lauren-berlant/>
Desperation is a taxing noise that gets more or less intense. Sometimes
in the places of economic cushion, emotional austerity is the norm for
virtue, and waste makes ordinary action toxic and the atmosphere
cortisol-cranky. I always try to remember that what we call the
structural reproduction of life is about the relation of concentrations
of wealth to other forms of social value and not just of who has the money.

*_Audra Simpson, Elizabeth A. Povinelli, and Liza Johnson—_*_*Holding Up
the World, Part IV: After a Screening of When the Dogs Talked at
Columbia University*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/holding-up-the-world-part-iv-after-a-screening-of-when-the-dogs-talked-at-columbia-university-audra-simpson-elizabeth-povinelli-and-liza-johnson-in-conversation/>
I’m suspicious of certain new and powerful models of requiring
documentaries to have “measurable impact.” I think it’s our job as
artists and intellectuals to be out in front of things, like canaries in
mineshafts, and to be looking for things which are there to be sensed,
like a tingling and hopefully collective Spidey-sense, but which might
not yet be there to be measured. Something more like “structures of
feeling,” or things that are in the air, which might have some other
kind of impact, some immeasurable impact.

*_Natasha Ginwala and Vivian Ziherl—_*_*The Negative Floats: Questions
of Earth Inheritance*_
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-negative-floats-questions-of-earth-inheritance-2/>
The question then remains, how might suffering manifest as aberrational
phenomenon—not least as earth-image but also as impossible terrestrial
formation? To borrow from Fernand Braudel, in what ways may landforms
transfigure as events of interruption and be themselves “the dust of
history?” Against the sedimentary backdrop of monopoly power, land may
be found in circulatory appearances and as a force of eruptive displacement.

*_Tess Lea—”From Little Things, Big Things Grow”: The Unfurling of Wild
Policy_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/%e2%80%9cfrom-little-things-big-things-grow%e2%80%9d-the-unfurling-of-wild-policy/>
Tracing (dys)function—how it occurs, and to whom, what, and how it is
ascribed—might yield fleeting glimpses of the stealthy means by which
systems of slow death occur under liberal beneficence, yet such
hard-to-ameliorate, enclosure-refusing life routes also resists neat
homilies. This too is a condition of their non-narratability: the
requirement to abandon a text without satisfactory end, for morally
affirming conclusion is also a misleading tact.

_*Gean Moreno and Ernesto Oroza—**“Un solo palo no hace monte”: Notes on
the Otherwise’s Inevitable Infecundity*_
knowing what happened.

So why can’t we then draw a direct line from its history into a present
where cinema has already been weaponized as the primary technique for
mobilizing vision—for drones and romantic comedies alike? From here it
only takes Farocki’s elegant sleight of hand to twist the apparatus back
on itself, to render its own technologies of control interesting,
seductive enough to be perceivable, perceivable enough to be accessible.
It is through cinema that power can become fascinating in its
complexity, charming in its grace, and deadly in its poetry, to the
point where the spell of its technology is broken. Once the aura is
gone, slippages appear at the very centers of command, where every lock
can be picked and US generals fumble blindly with their own software.
The technology has become impossible to master, and also available to
anyone. With Harun’s precise scrutiny, an intimate world of
techno-social micro-machinations comes to life. When an automated gate
closes and latches, Harun is there. When looking into the LCD screens
replacing rearview mirrors in cars, he is there. He is there when we
address a colleague at work with a certain title.

Farocki’s last work looked at the design of worlds within video games.
If we understand the history of cinema as also being the history of
optics, then what are the physics of a world made out of vision, of a
living cinema? In gamespace there is always a problem when you try to
leave, when you reach the edge of the world and you try to go past it,
to exit completely. And in Farocki’s /Parallel I–IV/, the moment you
reach the edge, you hit a transparent border. Even if you fall through
past the limit, the film loop starts again and you are urged to return.


To take Farocki’s preference for the instructional seriously is to
embark, joyously, upon an internal exile from much of what understands
itself as experimental culture. And now that Farocki is gone, it becomes
clear to me that his films, videos, television programs, essays, texts,
exhibitions, and interviews provide nothing less than an alternative
value system that enables you to encounter the mutation of images in the
present.

*_Ruchir Joshi—Also of Things: Notes for a Film Remembering Harun
Farocki_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/also-of-things-notes-for-a-film-remembering-harun-farocki/>

*_Christa Blümlinger—An Archaeologist of the Present_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/an-archaeologist-of-the-present/>
He himself liked to speak in metaphors and analogies; his line of
argument often took pictorial detours, forming chains and series much
like his shot sequences.

*_James Benning—FAROCKI_* <http://www.e-flux.com/journal/farocki/>
Harun Farocki rest in the peace you were so fighting for.

This timeline wills itself to stay as precise as possible in terms of
dates, names, observations, and comparisons. Learning from HF: each
sentence—recorded, pictured, drawn, written, or spoken—is potentially a
(never complete) archive of books and films as much as of thoughts and
gestures.

*_Anselm Franke—A Critique of Animation_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/a-critique-of-animation/>
Not only is it cheaper to use real actors in motion capture than to
produce characters from scratch in digital animation, it is also the way
to ensure that technology today has always-already been pushed beyond
the uncanny valley, because that valley itself is now bridged by the
investment of life into machines.

*_Cathy Lee Crane—Letters to Harun_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/letters-to-harun/>

*_Andreas Siekmann and Alice Cresicher—How to Wear a Scissor-Wielding
Trifecta on a T-Shirt_*
The photo below shows Harun wearing the scissor-wielding trifecta on a
T-shirt, after the Goethe Institute in Lisbon refused to print the icon
on their press release.

**_Thomas Elsaesser in conversation with Alexander Alberro—Farocki: A
Frame for the No Longer Visible_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/farocki-a-frame-for-the-no-longer-visible-thomas-elsaesser-in-conversation-with-alexander-alberro/>
*Just as hackers and Apple might well end up living in a symbiotic
relationship—as host-and-parasite, rather than as outright foes—Farocki
realized that a system can use its opponents as a way to self-regulate
and stabilize itself.

*_Filipa César—Joint Leopard Dot_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/joint-leopard-dot/>
Then Harun told me how he was interested in the deviations of meaning
and the polysemic nature of words. He said that if he were to choose
another occupation, he would be an etymologist.

*_Ute Holl—Farocki’s Cinematic Historiography: Reconstructing the
Visible_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/farockis-cinematic-historiography-reconstructing-the-visible/>
Extremely well acquainted with historical and contemporary systems of
thought, Farocki has written on historical materialism, semiotics, and
structuralism, but has defied all of them in filmic discourse.

The impact of Harun Farocki’s work was more than the howl of a dog in
tune with his instincts.

*_Constanze Ruhm—Attachment_* <http://www.e-flux.com/journal/attachment/>
A simple lesson I learned from Harun Farocki: on set, you can clap the
clapboard quietly too.

*_Trevor Paglen—Operational Images_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/operational-images/>
Something new was happening in the world of images, something that the
theoretical tools of visual studies and art history couldn’t account
for: the machines were starting to see for themselves. Harun Farocki was
one of the first to notice that image-making machines and algorithms
were poised to inaugurate a new visual regime.

<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/watch-and-learn-bani-khoshnoudi/>
*Somewhere, he himself said that it is not what is in a picture, but
what lies behind it that counts; that this should not stop us, as it
never stopped Farocki, from using and showing images, as if they are the
only source of proof we have for certain things.

*_Armin Linke—In His Reading Chair_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/in-his-reading-chair/>

*_Hito Steyerl—Beginnings_* <http://www.e-flux.com/journal/beginnings/>
A good beginning holds a problem in its most basic form. It looks
effortless, but rarely is. A good beginning requires the precision and
skill to say things simply. Like the crafts of making bricks, weapons,
or files on hard drives, there is an art of creating beginnings.


To characterize the dilemma, we borrow a phrase from the title of an
essay by Norbert Elias: /Involvement and Detachment/. These are not
polar opposites; rather, they are integral elements in all human social
and communicative action, always interconnected, on both the communal
and the personal level. The richness of this tension is indicated by the
existence of a whole range of near-synonyms for both terms: engagement,
participation vs. exclusion and critical distance, for instance. On the
other hand, there is no universal recipe for the way that
interconnectedness is to be enacted.



*Just obsessive, self absorbed, deluded, lonely, dirty, penniless,
alcoholic painters discussing what they love most. Turps Banana is the
only painting magazine written exclusively by painters.
magazine concentrates exclusively on painting and is written by
practicing painters. Uniquely the editorial remit carries a no
advertising policy so there is no distraction from the ranging debate
about contemporary painting.

/Andreas Schlaegel/ visits a skate ramp, made by the late *Michel
Majerus* at the turn of the millennium. As part of the regular series
‘In a Word,’ Italian artist *Carla Accardi *and Dutch design studio
*Metahaven* both explore the idea of ‘transparency’ and, in the first of
a new series ‘Trouvaille,’ /frieze d/e/ picks out favourites from the
ebb and flow of culture: a book, a cd, a shoe, and a gun.

On the back page: ‘Das Ding,’ artist and writer *Brian O’Doherty*
chooses The Sedan Chair as a special object of significance from his
working and living environment.


Montage, Metamorphosis, Masks: On the occasion of *Wangechi Mutu’s*
exhibition /My Dirty Little Heaven/, which Mutu conceived as Deutsche
Bank’s first ‘Artist of the Year’ at Deutsche Guggenheim, ArtMag
presents international artistic positions that question identities and
construct them in new ways.

Wangechi Mutu has transformed the *Deutsche Guggenheim* into a
fascinating environment that involves all senses. The show’s curator
Friedhelm Hütte, Global Head of Art, Deutsche Bank, introduces her work.

Her hyper-aesthetic collages quickly made Wangechi Mutu one of the most
interesting figures on the young American scene. Matthew Evans met her
in New York.

Disco Kid, Malcolm X, Angela Davis—photographer *Samuel Fosso* slips
into a wide array of roles, tapping African cultural history for his
store of props.

In the late sixties, *Jürgen Klauke* placed his own body at the center
of his photographic work. The directness of his early series has a new
relevance for a young generation of artists. An interview.

*Paulina Olowska* combines a wide variety of influences – references to
modernist utopias encounter the autobiographical; Pop Art meets the
visual residue of Warsaw Pact Socialism.

Rediscovered: The painter *Uwe Lausen* mixed radical social criticism
with bold formal experimentation.


The museum may now be assuming a new function in the network. It is
being reformatted as a recording device, a flexible memory machine that
can store culture like a bank, artworks like a storefront, politics in
the form of data. And each of these can be exchanged with one another as
currency: the political movement can be turned into an activist archive,
sold as an artwork, then exhibited as data, then sealed off in a vault
with cultural artifacts for safe keeping. Museums in China are built
without staff or contents to fill them long after they are constructed.
Others exist online, leaving their buildings to rot. But it would be
completely wrong to say that these are the dying gasps of another
old-fashioned, overweight institution suffering an identity crisis after

its contents got uploaded to the internet. Because more museums are
being built today than at any other time in human history. 

The construction of new and often private museums in financial centers
and free trade zones from Abu Dhabi to Hong Kong seem to point to
another function altogether, to a shift in the status of the museum from
its conservatorial role in society to one that starts to look
increasingly more computational. What are these strange new entities
that hoard artworks as financial artifacts and use CAD-designed
architecture to advertise a city or state? What do they do and what do
they want from us? They are not just vanity enterprises used for
laundering money. They are not just playthings for warlords and feudal
states. They are not just showrooms for auction houses. Because many are
doing the work of traditional museums—collecting, exhibiting, educating.
What is new concerns the scale at which they are being built, and the
peculiar way they suspend historical consciousness while desperately
filling themselves with content.

We have to admit that something very interesting is happening as the
archival function of the museum becomes secondary, when the importance
of the future or the past is superseded by the utility of the present,
by the question of how to format an archive in such a way that it can be
recognized and synchronized with other archives, with financial markets
but also with the historical disenfranchisement of groups whose losses
and pains have not been registered or quantified. These new museums seem
to lack a methodology, and yet they are going to work collecting,
stockpiling, caching, and building an archive at incredible speeds. What
is this fortune of stuff that is actually being amassed, and how is it
reformatting our own consciousness in turn? It may be interchangeable
and interoperable with other archives, other markets, and other file
systems, but is it legible?

—Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, Anton Vidokle

*_Franco “Bifo” Berardi—The Neuroplastic Dilemma: Consciousness and
Evolution_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-neuroplastic-dilemma-consciousness-and-evolution>
The automation of cognitive activity is going to be a major trend of the
coming age, and it marks a leap to the posthistorical dimension. In the
modern humanist sense, “history” is the process of the conscious
affirmation of free projects in the field of political action. But the
cognitive mutation that we are talking about is going to dissolve the
historical relation between consciousness, politics, and freedom.

*_Hito Steyerl—Proxy Politics_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/proxy-politics/>
A face without a butt cannot sit. It has to take a stand. A butt without
a face needs a stand-in for most kinds of communication. Proxy politics
happens between taking a stand and using a stand-in. In the territory of
displacement, stacking, subterfuge and montage thus created, both the
worst and the best things could happen.

*_Arseny Zhilyaev—Conceptual Realism: The Vulgar Freedom of Avant-Garde
Museum Work_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/conceptual-realism-the-vulgar-freedom-of-avant-garde-museology>
Indeed, the transformation of the museum into a work of conceptual art
would have been an extraordinary event not only for the art of socialist
realism, but also for the Western artistic quest of those years.
Nowadays, the ideas of vulgar sociologism that the Proletkult workers
and the representatives of the “sociological” school of museum display
were charged with still sound horrible to most intellectuals.

*_Jonas Staal—To Make a World, Part II_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/to-make-a-world-part-ii-the-art-of-creating-a-state>
We are thus dealing with two fundamentally conflicting states performing
themselves: the recognized state of Mali, embedded, through the French,


*_Anna Tzini—The Opacity of Queer Languages_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-opacity-of-queer-language-2>
Queer slangs are full of irony on several different levels that are
recognized by all, but only meant for some. Often the same (ironic)
phrase can have different groups laughing for reasons that are not only
different, but also politically oppositional, producing a third layer of
humor for those who understand both meanings and can see how others are
laughing at something that could be read against themselves, but without
having the faintest idea.

 
cliché, */Being Singular Plural: Moving Images from India/* shows how
diverse the country’s art scene really is. ArtMag reports on the show
and introduces outstanding contemporary Indian artists.

Shine and shininess are characteristic of surface effects, of glamour
and spectacle, of bling-bling contingency, of ephemeral novelty, value
added, and disposable fascination. Shine is what seizes upon affect as
its primary carrier to mobilize attention. Shine could be the
paradoxically material base of an optical economy typically
(mis)understood as being purely cognitive or immaterial. Even at an art
fair or Hollywood gala, surface effects are widely deployed while being
categorically condemned to the domain of inconsequential superficiality,
for shine is also persistently unwilling to compromise speed for
substance, surface for depth, attractiveness for soul, effect for
content, projection for stasis, inflationary wealth, success, and
splendor for reality.

Indeed, it is the particular materiality of declarative shininess that
we now recognize as a clear sign of paradox, as it is so often used to
mediate decay and divert attention away from oncoming collapse. And as
we now start to recognize how lighting effects constitute a primary
function of what can only exist through mechanisms and metaphorologies
of visibility, recognition, refraction, and dissemination, we might
start to ask whether there is another side to shine altogether. Does
shine not also serve a core planetary function of giving life to our
planet, through the solar capital of the sun? We cannot afford to be
idealistic here, as the sun’s light and heat do not always disclose and
reveal. They cannot be geo-engineered through cool roofings at will,
since they’re equally cruel and unstable. The sun’s radiance also
subtracts life—it produces famine, drought, and night.

Edited together with Tom Holert, this first of a two-part issue of
/e-flux journal/, though determined to focus on shine, surfaces, and
light in all their aesthetic peculiarity and contemporary relevance,
aims less at adding to the (still very slim) cultural history of the
phenomenon than to rendering palpable the cross-sections of power and
aesthetics in the material and immaterial discourses of shine—past,
present, and future.

—Tom Holert, Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, Anton Vidokle

In this issue:
**
*_Tom Holert—The Sunshine State_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-sunshine-state/>
How much sun is needed to maintain or improve psychic and physical
health? What are the repercussions of ripples in global energy markets
on local labor politics? To what extent is the distribution of wealth
related to the distribution of light? Questions of this order are placed
in the folds of the narrative and the imagery of Dardenne’s film, and
they keep haunting the western-style tale of the heroine searching for a
reason among her coworkers and within herself to stay alive in the
desert of the solar-industrial real. 

*_Timotheus Vermeulen—The New “Depthiness”_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-new-depthiness/>
But what the line from /Girls /hints at is that, just maybe, we are
seeing the first stage in another history of another kind of deepening,
one whose empirical reality lies above the surface even if its
performative register floats just below it: depthiness. 

*_Adrian Rifkin—Yes, That’s What I think_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/yes-thats-what-i-think/>
Stricken almost speechless, my friend managed to say only, “Hello, big,
isn’t it?” To which the tutor replied, “Yes, and shiny too,” and passed
on without more than a glance at the supposed masterpiece. Was it a
judgment on my friend’s simplemindedness, or maybe on his incapacity
even to have registered the shine? Or on the painting that was thus
relegated to some storeroom of Adornian kitsch, even disqualified and
misattributed, precisely on account of its shine, its over-varnish? A
Caravaggio, even?

*_Sven Lütticken—Shine and Schein_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/shine-and-schein/>
In his early essay on Wagner, written during the Nazi period, Adorno
characterized Wagner’s music theatre as “phantasmagoric” precisely
because of its basis in commodity fetishism. In trying to create a
seamless illusion and a dream-like atmosphere, Wagner prefigured later,
more technologically advanced manifestations of the culture industry,
while his tableaux on stage recalled contemporaneous displays of
consumer goods. In the phantasmagoria, “wird der ästhetische Schein vom
Charakter der Ware ergriffen.” Wagner’s operas are dependent on the
concealment of labor, a prerequisite of commodity fetishism. 
**
*_Brian Kuan Wood—Is it Heavy or Is it Light?_*
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/is-it-heavy-or-is-it-light/>
Under a regime of visibility that usurps older notions of substance,
what figures can we use to affirm its surface effects, to understand its
refractive powers, to crack open its hidden energies and make its
calculus work for us and not against us? How has this new superficiality
realized and flipped the politics of spectacle described by Debord? And
why should we take a closer look at the sun?

of the Arts / Shedhalle / White Space.

its hosts. But now there are so many petitions, so many threats to
withdraw, that it becomes clear that the conditions for producing and
exhibiting art have become ethically unbearable for too many artists—and
this comes at the same time that the economic and political utility of
contemporary art is becoming clear to global players discovering how
supporting vanguard cultural production can humanize their own image.
Where industrialists before put their surplus into culture*—*often to
curry favor with the municipality—now municipalities, industrialists,
and feudal lords alike use culture as advertising. And the staggering
number of boycotts can be understood as the artistic response to these
particular advances in the industrialization of the art world, and of art.

An important part of this shift is a change in the status of cultural
production in general. Basically, art can no longer be taken to be an
automatically good thing. If artworks have for over a century pointed to
transformations in political or social consciousness, many artists are
now coming to terms with the degree to which artworks are already
functionalized as instruments of blunt social and political realities.
While these realities might be depressing to idealistic types, or
confusing to connoisseurial contemplative types, it would be a shame to
miss what a profound reformatting of time we are currently experiencing
when the engine of historical progress that defined the modern tradition
slows down and bifurcates into the endless mirroring and redistribution
of the present time. Technology turns naturalistic and advanced
materialist accounts read global swarms of waste products for legible
signs, for points where planetary-scale desires start to look structural
or infrastructure-ish. The real discovery in all this may in fact be in
a slow and relentless unraveling of what a sham the modern tradition may
have been the whole time as an era profoundly overstuffed with heroic
being boycotted. In many cases the same artists withdrawing their
participation are actually extremely interested in the bloodstained
funder, the weapons manufacturer, the moral police, or the draconian
state policies, which they stand together with other artists to oppose.

Of course this is by no means a contradiction. Rather, it suggests that
we may be witnessing a very sophisticated war of position that is
renegotiating the way artists seek to simultaneously instrumentalize and
be instrumentalized by hegemonic forces that far surpass them in scale.
It is to say: a dictator is funding the exhibition, and I will not
participate in the exhibition with my work on this dictator—he belongs
to me, and within my work, and I do not belong to him. In terms of
military strategy, it can be taken as a flanking or pincer maneuver to
surround and contain the thing that might otherwise surround and contain
you.

The artist Ahmet Öğüt, who has found himself participating in a number
turning a biennial into an exposé on the transgressions of its funders.
Potentially scaring those funders away for good when they realize they
are in over their heads.

—Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, Anton Vidokle

In this issue:

*_Simon Sheikh—Circulation and Withdrawal, Part I: Circulation_*
<http://e-flux.com/journal/circulation-and-withdrawal-part-i-circulation>
But the fact that the production of a magazine is withdrawn from the
public is not the same as an exit from the public sphere as such; it is
not a withdrawal from and of discourse. Why, then, circulation and
withdrawal? This has to do with the relation a magazine has to its
objects and subjects, and how it constitutes a public as specific, and
sometimes in opposition to dominant forms of publicness and official
cultural policies. Sometimes withdrawal is enforced, through economy or
censorship, but other times it is intentional and tactical: the
withdrawal from certain public debates and arenas is what makes an
alternative cultural and critical production possible.

*_Ahmet Öğüt—CCC: Currency of Collective Consciousness_*

Thinking of how to make all these concepts more effective, I would
suggest the idea of the “Intervenor”: an autonomous outside voice who
nonetheless has the right to act within the institution. Intervenors
could not only act within the walls of the white cube, but could also
directly intercede when it comes to matters of communication, events,
bureaucracy, administration, and even the office space itself.

*_Paolo Virno—Déjà Vu and the End of History_*

But what can “remembering the present” mean, except having the
irresistible sensation of having already experienced it previously?
Inasmuch as it is an object of memory, the “now” is camouflaged as the
already-been, and is thus duplicated in an imaginary “back then,” in a
fictitious “other-then.” It goes without saying that between the current
event, considered a mere repeat, and the phantom original prototype,
there is no mere analogy, but rather the most complete identity. The
present and the pseudo-past, which have the same perceptual and
emotional content, are indistinguishable. The consequence is a troubling
one: every act and every word that I say and do now seems destined to
repeat, step by step, the course that was fixed back then, without the
possibility of omitting or changing anything.
injured. The Yemenis die as if they never lived. This is true mainly
because the French blood flowed in a place full of light, in the City of
Light, while the Yemeni blood flowed in darkness.

In Raunig’s analysis the university, and the humanities in particular,
are a political matter, not because of their supposedly “disinterested
beauty,” alienated from any social and political context, but precisely
because they constituted a zone of critique, resistant to marketization
and financialization, and they therefore enrich the cultural experience
of contemporary individuals.

 
Although eight months into the global economic crisis, artists, curators
and art lovers from every corner of the globe are about leave some of
their troubles behind and fly to Venice to look at the world’s latest
show—whose works have evolved from socialist realism, /thangkha/ and
traditional Chinese painting to interpreting the world through popular
culture, mass media and the printed word after he moved to London.

However, at the heart of all discussions on arts funding, whether it
comes from Hanoi or Hollywood, is the reality that the ever-growing art
world navigates the same choppy financial waters. Let’s hope that
artists, curators and patrons—whether they are heading for Venice or
working in their studios in Karachi and Korea—remain undeterred by such
challenges.

We have a soft spot for people, for our own humanity. We learn to
nurture this soft spot through art, through philosophy, through
democracy, through our notions of justice or the rights of humans. We
learn about the good in the things that are done by the people, for the
people, through the people, in the name of the people.

But it’s getting cold out there. Something in this setup is shifting
below our feet. Something is making the image of the people fuzzy,
increasingly vague—a floating signifier missing its referent. Now
militants who might have once fought for an idea are increasingly
self-interested. Artworks are starting to function more like investment
vehicles that no longer need to be seen by people. And some say that our
most recent stage of planetary evolution—our current geological epoch—is
distinguished mainly by the permanently destructive effects of human
industry on the biosphere, in species extinction, deforestation,
pollution, radiation, and so on. Which is to say that humanity can no
longer be taken as the solution to anything. On the contrary, and from
the perspective of the earth, humanity looks increasingly like the problem. 

So how can the humanistic tradition of art continue when humans are
turning the biosphere into a place uninhabitable by humans themselves?
An artist today may now suddenly find the only addressee to be a future
of despair, of catastrophic human extinction, of death. What does art
look like when it is made without any future to look forward to? 

We may be able to look at this another way. Because even though this
apocalyptic view of the world sees the end of humanity, it also sees
humans as the super-authors of their own doom, and even as authors of
the collapse of the planet’s ecosystem. Humans may be eradicated soon,
but at the same time this scenario understands humanity as more
supremely powerful than at any time since the Enlightenment, even though
this power is purely negative. 

So the artist working under these conditions may discover a certain
pleasure in the violent spectacle of annihilation. In the sheer scale of
its consequences, she may understand the megalomaniac thrill of having a
stake in the architecture of planetary despair. Incapable of modesty,
the artist in this situation might only find the means to abandon a
bloated humanist positivism for a turbocharged death drive. But we
should be careful not to get too excited here. Because in this situation
we are not really witnessing the death of humanism so much as the thrill
of seeing what it might do in reverse. Which might be a muffled cry for
the promises of a classical humanism.

One can imagine a full shift of attention towards survival technologies.
An artist must find ways to harness nuclear energy, to build better
bunkers, to financialize everything possible by hoarding abstract
capital that can only be spent on symbolic capital. Do we know what this
art looks like? It might in fact look like nothing at all—hidden away
inside a bunker, or appearing as a mirror that shows you your own image,
but turned up a notch. Purged of positivist fantasies, it might only
appear as money does: as an uncannily base dumb material like a stone or
iron ore, but one that comes with a ghostly promise of eventually being
exchanged for something better that may never come to pass.

The Anthropocene is “the age of man” that announces its own extinction.
In other words, the Anthropocene thesis posits “man” as the end of its
own destiny. Therefore, while the Anthropocene narrative keeps “man” at
its very center, it marks the death of the posthuman and of
antihumanism, because there can be no redeeming critical antihumanist or
posthuman figure in which either metaphysics or technological and
scientific advances would find a way to reconcile human life with
ecology. In short, /images/ of the Anthropocene are missing. 

Front. Those authorities attentive to the evidence of this metabolic
rift usually imagine four ways of mitigating its effects. One is that
the market will take care of everything. Another proposes that all we
need is new technology. A third imagines a social change in which we all
become individually accountable for quantifying and limiting our own
carbon “footprint.” A fourth is a romantic turn away from the modern,
from technology, as if the rift is made whole when a privileged few shop
at the farmer’s market for artisanal cheese. None of these four
solutions seems quite the thing. 

The idea of duty-free art has one major advantage over the nation-state
cultural model: duty-free art ought to/have no duty/—no duty to perform,
to represent, to teach, to embody value. It should not be indebted to
anyone, nor serve a cause or a master, nor be a means to anything.
To the extent that the object of critical theory is the mode of
governance, or the distribution of power, critical theory addresses this
object through cultural forms or products, as manifestations and
critiques of power relations. That is, on the one hand cultural
productions are symptomatic of these relations, while on the other
analytic of them—having the potential of intervention and critique,
again with a specific placement and angle, or, if you will, method of
intervention and mode of address. Critical writing is thus a sort of
double or shadow, whose task is not only to trace the work, but also to
respond to it and to separate the symptom and the analysis, as well as
to unpack the overlaps, contrasts, mergers, and mutations of these two
moments and movements. And this is a radically different task than that
of art advising—or that of the aesthetic judgment of yore, for that matter!
was so far ahead of his time that, say, his contemporaries did not
understand him, but rather because, when it came to positioning himself
successfully in art with an enduring place in history, he made several
“mistakes.” Among other things, despite Péladan’s hard work and the
genuinely large influence he enjoyed in his day, he did not do enough,
and above all was not sufficiently convincing, to ensure that he would
be “right” in art history. He did not persevere long enough in his
practice, he was not successful enough in assembling a coherent group of
artists, and he was not well connected to the market. Furthermore, he
was so extremely pompous and so obviously contradictory that it made it
difficult for anyone to take up his cause openly and in earnest. 

Architecture remains the most tangible way of constructing the social.
Yet, the system we call “architecture” is not reducible to the physical,
the tactile, the obvious. In the history of avant-garde architecture,
immateriality and intangibility carried a promise of liberation, of
escape from the heaviness of building, from completion, from gravity or
reality. A new contemporary architecture would be built out of pure
knowledge—drafted on paper as an idea to be shared, never bogged down by
the technicalities of constructing in dimensional space, or even any
spatial paradigm altogether. The history of the avant-garde can’t—as
Beatriz Colomina has pointed out—be separated from its engagement with
media and communication. Building would move at the speed of thought and
spirit, superseding calculation, regulation, codes, and existing
infrastructure.

But what are these levers? Or for that matter, how has architecture
always given form to the immaterial or intangible spatial effects in
communication pathways, or war, rubble, memory, tourism, and cultural
capital? Hasn’t architecture always provided a way of reading ethical
transgressions in reverse, of giving them form, for better or for worse?
How has physical architecture always been a symptom of ideology? How has
it always been a communications infrastructure?

Airbnb can be part of a new integrated meta-architecture that involves
the pooling and marketing of space in a way where, in a broad sense,
architectural interventions on the level of building tend to serve as
decorative afterthoughts to the capture and recording of not only space,
but also of practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, and
skills. This is the aim of UNESCO’s initiative over the past decade to
update the concept of cultural heritage to include immaterial and
intangible cultural products. UNESCO’s Intangible cultural heritage
(ICH) becomes a device for making another layer of global culture
visible and searchable across long distances, and an amplifying
mechanism for heritage that can allow it to be converted from culture
into a knowledge database, and back into culture again. Is this
something we can compare to what Lebanese architect Bernard Khoury
imagined as a building that would record memories of a place as data,
but also demolish its physical matter with each kilobyte or megabyte it
records?

The second issue of “Architecture as Intangible Infrastructure” will be
released in September 2015 with essays and contributions from Beatriz
Colomina, Bernard Khoury, Hu Fang, Ingo Niermann and Rem Koolhaas, Hans
Ulrich Obrist in conversation with Hans Hollein, and others.



In contemporary urbanization, a plethora of symbols and meanings has
become the generic curtain behind which the abstraction of capital
operates. It is for this reason that the task of the coming architecture
 is not simply to unmask the undeniable abstraction of architecture as a
process, but to make legible a form of architecture in which the
awareness of the conditions in which we dwell can become the
precondition for new forms of life within and against the power of
abstraction.


The management of public affect through authorized circulation has
broken down all over the postcolonial world, if not elsewhere,
disrupting older transactions between sovereign power and a population
seen as susceptible to sensorial powers. Media has become the
infrastructural condition of /living/, rather than existing as distinct,
regulated sites like the cinema theater, or as celluloid. The always
emergent potential (or “becoming virtual”) of mediation is now a
generalized condition of affect-driven postcolonial media modernity in
India, if not most parts of the world today.


When media art is not generated by microchips, it grows out of the petri
dish, as /AAP/ contributing editor Chin-Chin Yap discovers in the
cutting-edge bio-art of *SymbioticA*. The artistic experiments at the
Australian “curiosity-based, non-utilitarian” research lab in the
University of Western Australia’s Department of Anatomy and Human
The invisible rays are described as a “medium” that penetrates objects
and is revealed on screens. A floating technical surface acts as the
most intimate witness of the otherwise hidden interior. An architecture
is established that inverts the classical relationship between inside
and outside, an architecture we still live in with our countless screens
monitoring endless invisible flows. Architects, historians, and
theorists quickly absorbed the new paradigm—developing an entire logic
of the invisible in the early decades of the twentieth century that
remains largely in place. New medical screens are today creating new
forms of architecture as the relationship between inside and outside
passes through another twist. New forms of intimacy are emerging.
The smoothing of distinctions between humanitarianism and capitalist
consumerism is typically regarded—from the perspectives of
humanitarianism and capitalism alike—as “progress.” As a typical claim
asserts, “with significant logistical abilities, massive resources
invested in R&D and highly capable personnel, many within the aid
community hope that businesses can do for humanitarian aid what Amazon
did for the world of retail or what Microsoft and Apple did for personal
computing.” But the humanitarian history of the housing question reveals
that “businesses” do not only facilitate humanitarian aid, but also
facilitate some of the conditions that humanitarianism responds to.
 
on various issues, we displayed a long drawing that mapped the network
of a fictional building project. A stadium construction site sat in the
center of the drawing and both sides charted the paths of migrant
construction workers as they travel from their villages to job sites as
well the movement of a steel truss from design to fabrication to a
building site. In the drawing, a steel truss is designed by architects
based on the overall stadium design, aesthetics, and functional criteria.
 
Monumentaries are historical buildings that have been purposefully
altered post facto in order to influence our perception and conception
of them. Any careful observer of historic buildings knows that, in order
to keep them standing over the centuries, some measure of alteration is
always necessary, but that doesn’t make every monument a monumentary. I
want to distinguish between alterations due to low-level maintenance,
like replacing a couple shingles to fix a leaky roof, and alterations
made for editorial reasons, like replacing a metal roof with clay
shingles in order to create a more historically accurate image of the
building at the moment of original construction. Only the latter type of
alteration is an intentional attempt to turn the monument into a
monumentary.


I designed an apparatus that would serve to literally physically
demolish war-torn buildings located on what used to be the battlefields
of Beirut. The demolition apparatus would also serve as a memory
collector, an inhabitable capsule in which memory is deposited as
quantified data. The more memory you collect, the more matter you
demolish. The ashes of the building would be collected and stored in a
newly-constructed transparent peripheral membrane. The process ends with
the complete demolition of the ruin and the physical saturation of the
transparent peripheral membrane and the memory collector.

The Argentinian architects Gustavo Dieguez and Lucas Gilardi, who
operate the architecture firm A77, define their role as architects
differently. They often attend to their building—mostly through
infrastructural interventions—over long periods of time. They always
return to the building process to discuss improvements with the dwellers
before rebuilding or adding to the structures. On the Plaza Parque
Patricios they built their wooden structure El gran Aula, which was
composed of modules and embodied the idea of an “open school.” Each
module was used to teach something: photography, design, music, cooking.
In the case of El gran Aula, the building isn’t a formally defined
sculpture, but rather an open framework for various forms of action,
occupation, and implantation.
 
*Hu Fang—Towards a Non-Intentional Space*
There is a modest power that applies to both the art of gardens and that
of farming, both of which reference natural laws of nourishment,
preservation, and anticipation; although they are not revolutionary
formulas, they both oppose contempt for life. As I see it, the art of
the garden and the art of farming have always been concealed within the
progress of modernity, but for a long time we have had no means to
encounter them, no capacity for listening to the sounds of their presence.
 

This open arrangement of the galleries accommodates modern contemporary
art with its rejection of chronological series. It allows for
exhibitions that highlight the complexity of the creative approaches
that coexist at any point in time. The same applies to the museum in
Frankfurt, which also features very different rooms: galleries with
skylights or sidelights, ones that are dark, as well as round and
angular rooms. It lets each work of art find its place and gives the
visitor the freedom to devise his or her own way through the exhibition.
I also think a museum is not an erratic block; it’s a building for the
community to take possession of. 
 
oak sapling that a worker took to Poland, planted, and named after his boss.
 

Since architecture is so fundamentally nostalgic it has not been able to
develop a discourse and an ideology that accepts the real conditions
that cities offer now. The architectural profession is stuck, which
forces it to almost reject anything that really happens and to design
public space in a neurotic and authoritarian way. The other space that
architects and thinkers about architecture neglect in terms of not
reflecting on it is the political system, which enters the picture with
incredible brutality.
 

I’ll gesture for you to follow me. “We’re in one of the walkways between
the big tower and one of the smaller towers.” It’s just 70 cm long, and
about 50 cm wide. “Notice. Windows on both sides.” You will feel like
you’re also floating somewhere between two-dimensional and
three-dimensional space. You will feel tiny and also immense because
Berlin slices right through this anti-room.

heteronymous signs. For Reza Negarestani, philosophy can break this
stranglehold of heteronymy through its programmatic and functionalist
deployment of thought and thinking as an already autonomous enterprise.
By establishing and structuring realizable commitments towards their own
ends and demands, philosophy still has the capacity to release a
full-blown project of emancipation via the extreme rationality of
thought’s computability and capacity for abstraction. For Negarestani,
thought itself is an ancient artificial intelligence whose resilience
stems from its artificial capacity to reinvent itself.
—Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, Anton Vidokle

now than it was in the twentieth century. eBay, Craigslist, and Etsy
have gutted thrift and antique stores across North America of all their
good stuff, and in Paris, the Marché aux Puces de Saint-Ouen is but a
shadow of its former self. eBay itself, once groaning with low-hanging
fruit being sold by the clueless, is now a suburban shopping center with
the occasional semi-okay vintage thingy still floating around. This same
sense of sparseness is felt in the museum world, where the slashing of
programming budgets remains the norm.

the right to stop it, unless it wants to show arrogance and capriciousness.

In fact, contemporary globalization is the direct opposite of the modern
ideal of internationalism and universality. The world of globalization
is not a world of international solidarity or shared cultural values.
Nor is globalization the realm of the anonymous “crowd mind” as it was
celebrated by postmodernism. Rather, it is the world of the global
competition of everybody against everybody. This competition pushes the
subject who participates in it to mobilize his or her own human capital.
And human capital, as described, for example, by Michel Foucault, is
primarily the cultural heritage that is mediated by the family and
milieu in which an individual grows up.

Actually, there is a quite a bit of dancing in Marx. To begin at the
beginning, there are his poems, written for his distant love and
ballroom baroness, Jenny von Westphalen, who waited for him seven long
years as he studied to get his degree. Marx’s poetry reaches out to its
promised partner with memories of the ballroom, or so one imagines,
interrupted by long, if chaperoned, afternoon strolls. The verses whirl
and twist, curl and rust. These are generic salon rhythms, hammered out
somewhat mechanically, but the goal is earnest enough: to protect
transcendent love and shared ideals from the dirty world.

The mayor, with the town’s approval, rejects the offer, saying: “We are
in Africa but the drought will never make us savages.” The village

The status of corruption may be said to lie at the division of visible
and invisible labour, and at this tipping point it “acts out” and loops
back into the body politic as a sentient character. The daily-wage
worker and the cognitariat are equally implicated in this realm and made
subservient to the uncanny sweep of the veiled hand of corruption. The
social contract is breached repeatedly through its perverse pleasure
fantasies and subterranean nightmares.

In the lead-up to major cultural events including the Shanghai Expo and
the Biennale of Sydney, /ArtAsiaPacific/ adopts an optimistic view of
the future in our May/June issue. Inspired by the mission of the World’s
Fair to promote cross-cultural gatherings not as contests but as
opportunities for human advancement through the exchange of ideas, we
explore how artists pursue aesthetics and politics in the hope of seeing
their way through a world that is both dizzy with change and mired in
old fears and assumptions.

Features include managing editor William Pym’s rumination on the 17th
edition of the *Biennale of Sydney* with artistic director David
Elliott, who touches on the ways that contemporary art finds beauty in
our differences, and how artists’ uses of irony, illusion and distance
can shed light on societal inequalities. Features editor Ashley Rawlings
navigates the practice of Melbourne-based artist *Brook Andrew*, a
James Trainor mines the work of Jerusalem-born video artist
*Omer Fast*, hailed for his investigations into the mediated experiences
of film, television and narrative storytelling, and contributing editor
Olivier Krischer examines the controversial career of Beijing-based
artist duo *Sun Yuan and Peng Yu*.The corpse allows the artist to rescue a time undone, and at the same
time mock death. In other words: the more an artist fills him/herself
with death, the more he/she transcends it. Let us remember Goya drawing
among the piles of shooting-squad victims at La Moncloa, Rembrandt
attending autopsies to create his two anatomy paintings, David before a
freshly stabbed Marat, or Caravaggio turning a dead woman fished from
the Tiber River into the Dead Mother of God; or Grünewald. The Cuban
people need to overcome the death taboo and face Fidel Castro’s
corpse—while also preparing themselves to bury his political legacy. To
own this collective need to visualize a corpse could become a
revitalizing imperative for Cuban art.

Today my art is respected mainly because I believe in it. I respected it
 
With the advent of Google, Wikipedia and the global embrace of an
easy-share, watered-down aesthetic in everything from architecture to
graphic design, so-called innovations to connect the world and make it
seem smaller also raise the question of what constitutes “collective
memory.” Artists are often early barometers of change, and an interest
in archiving and reclaiming one’s own history has recently become a
prominent topic. By unearthing overlooked themes in the art of the

Elsewhere in features, managing editor William Pym reappraises the
controversial Indigenous Australian painter and video artist *Richard
Bell* and his alter ego, “Richie,” while editor-at-large HG Masters gets
together with Tel Aviv’s *Sigalit Landau*, just prior to the
announcement that she will represent Israel at the 2011 Venice Biennale.
Masters considers Landau’s predilection for the “morbid, masochistic and
postapocalpytic,” and anticipates the shape her work might take in the
unfortunate event of a second Gaza War.

In our long-form review, Malcolm Cossons takes a look at “When Three
Dreams Cross,” a sweeping photographic survey spanning 150 years at
London’s Whitechapel Gallery, and senior editor Don J. Cohn covers two
new publications on film and visual culture in India and Pakistan, as
well as a surprising artist’s book by *Aisha Khalid* that is at once
delightfully blank and full of persuasive, subliminal narrative.


Framework 6 assembles different national and urban case studies and
theorizes from different angles of Europe how the paradigm of creativity
contributes to the instrumental use of creativity and what kind of
impact it has on the arts and culture at large.
Tim Griffin on the toxic delights of safety orange; Elizabeth Esch on
the failed Fordlandia project in Brazil; Lytle Shaw on the
unphotographable Ernst Moiré; an interview with Scott Sandage on the
cultural history of failure in America; and more
Anyone found on the

Will be off their heads

The Management

shoddy
Situationist stunt and one of those T-shirts that corrupt corporate
logos:
The sign was peeled of the wall by a pill-popping clubber who stuck it
to

Tom Morton explores the work of Jeremy Deller from Advance Warning Sign
to
Acid Brass, Secret Hand Signals for the Middle Classes, The Battle of
Orgreave, and his latest project After the Gold Rush.

Plus Rebecca Warren, Eric Wesley, Daniel Roth, Walid Raad, Deimantas
Narkevicius and Kerstin Kartscher

manual work of mixing, shaping and presenting baked goods and sweets was
a


SPECIAL: VOICE
Everywhere in the visual art world, voices are rising. In the beginning
they spoke about art, today they speak as art. What is the meaning of
this shift away from the visual?


Winter landscapes, pristine deserts of ice, crystals: in keeping with
the chilly season, db artmag’s current issue investigates art below
freezing – works that address the theme of coldness either in a concrete
way or on a symbolic, social, or metaphorical level.
*True North*: Isaac Julien is considered to be one of the most important
video artists of the present day; his works have often been the subject
of controversial debate. His latest video installation addresses the
sublime in landscape and juxtaposes the apparently immaculate Arctic

On one level, it is simple common sense to suppose that one can only
begin to write after learning how to read. But, at the same time, this
ordering also takes for granted that consumption must necessarily come
before production; only after you consume knowledge will you then be
capable of producing it. It is a fundamental understanding of learning
that is typical of the master-apprentice model found in craft guilds.
The problem arises when the language to be learned has not yet been
invented, or the practice of a craft is not controlled by a guild.

Art education, on the other hand, has deeply internalized this problem
by taking the inverse for granted; that one writes; first, and only
later develops a language with which to read what was written. What
would it mean to then build an institution around this idea? Such an
institution would necessarily be ahistorical, and perhaps even amnesiac.
It would resemble a Tower of Babel, in which each work could be
understood as its own language, projecting its own art history.

In the past few years, debates around art education have experienced a
gradual, yet determined drift from an interest in open formats and the
emancipatory potentials of semi-institutional structures, to discussions
of how those educational institutions can be optimized, or even
standardized. One can easily dismiss this shift towards pragmatism for
reflecting an endemic crisis of the imagination; and it probably does,
but it is also a necessarily concrete response to very real threats to
art education that have come in the form of severe budget cuts and
sweeping measures to bring art production in line with the broader
administrative mandates of research universities.

Yet the field of art is not set up to deal with these administrative
challenges, for it refuses to offer a definitive answer to the question
of what it is actually doing: the question “What is art?” must be left
open. The more important and interesting question then concerns not the
prudishness of this refusal, but the fact that the most useful answers
are always provided in the negative. These are the answers that account
for the fact that art education is, in fact, a fundamental paradox;
almost a contradiction in terms. For how can we even begin to think
about teaching something that, on a basic level, cannot be taught? How
to form the audacity to make moves that have not been already
sanctioned, and within spaces where they may not be acceptable?
Fostering this audacity is less a structural concern; of how to deal
with a given space, of how to access a history or a network of
relations, of how to make work visible, and so forth—and more a question
of identifying the kind of thinking that can surpass structures and
institutionalization altogether. We might call this artistic thinking.

On the one hand, following from Camnitzer, granting the artist a
position that precedes language (and, by extension, history), while
opening a large space for experimentation, could be seen as a tediously
romantic endorsement of the artist as mad genius; unaccountable and
unaware of the vocabularies that have consolidated around him or her.
But would this not be another way of describing an already-existing
hysteria embedded in a field where all legitimating mechanisms are
subject to highly contingent and subjective impressions and projections
of value and importance? While we could say that a vocabulary exists for
linking these together, it still does not manage to form a coherent
language of judgment, of totalizing denouncement or terms that could
otherwise measure the definitive success or failure of a work of art.
This could be the source of a good amount of psychosis, but it would be
even more insane to suggest that a central authority /should/ form a
central criterion of aesthetic judgment as a template for all. And
anyhow, art at its best does not provide answers and solutions; it
creates problems.
I wondered whether I could devise a system that would turn this on its
head. Instead of having a secrecy haven, we could have an openness haven./

/As substance, artistic thinking is more important than medical
thinking, since art may inform and contribute to the latter, while the
opposite is less likely. However, as crafts go, a surgeon is more
important for society than a painter is./


/While one could argue the impossibility of adequately representing
institutional aims in a paragraph or two, this does not mean
prospectuses cannot be read as being symptomatic of the transformations
art is likely to undergo in entering the university context.
Accordingly, one could infer a positivist slant in their formulation of
what constitutes an artistic PhD; revealing an attitude proximate to
other disciplines based on the incremental accumulation of knowledge./


*Jon Rich; The Blood of the Victim: Revolution in Syria and the Birth of
the Image-Event* <http://e-flux.com/journal/view/241>

/It is in this sense that the image creates meaning, and one can say
that this one created an expression: those of us who saw the photo and
were affected by it are now able to chart the course of death walked by
this child. Carter’s photo is an image of the isthmus that separates
life from death. It is thus pain imagined, and pain transformed from an
individual and private feeling to a shared and public one./

/Although censorship and self-censorship were, are and always will
remain an issue in the showcasing of art, whether in the UAE or
elsewhere (or perhaps one should say that overt censorship exposes a
show of force by the powers-that-be when the implicit rules of
self-censorship fail), it is clearly not the only issue at stake now,
several weeks after these events began to unfold./

was that it placed many of the complexities and contradictions of
economic problems within a clear and singular binary between capitalism
and communism. On top of that, arguments in favor of one or the other
had massive geopolitical blocs backing them, and the sheer scale alone
was enough to draw any economic argument into the tide of one side or
the other. This made it only natural for dominant narratives following
the dismantling of communism to profess the triumph of capitalism.
However, it is only now that the logic of global capitalism has begun to
collapse from within that we are forced to consider the fact that
economic value and actual worth have actually been floating on parallel
tracks this entire time.

Of course, in the field of art as we know it, easy solutions for this
tension have never been an issue. On the contrary, the field has always
been subsidized by public funding, wealthy patrons, and personal assets
precisely on the basis that art surpasses clear and straightforward
valuation in economic terms. On the one hand this has made for a strange
hybrid economy where a humanist tradition also has its own commodity
market, while on the other it has managed to remain a sphere in which a
lack of faith in any terms for clear economic validation has somehow
managed to remain intact. Even officially in many cases, public and
private funding alike would flow to art precisely because art was
understood to provide an exception to the geopolitical rule.

Now, all the signs say there is a good chance much of this support will
dry up, and that before too long we will all be poor. But at the same
time, this likelihood is not the result of a single political agenda
(though many politicians in places like the US and the Netherlands
welcome the cuts), but a much broader series of collapses in a global
economic system that by now eludes the possibility of identifying clear
ideological friends and enemies. The problem really affects us all.

Still, the sources of art’s livelihood have always been dispersed,
somewhat self-serving, and partly non-existent. This means that survival
will probably not be a problem, and furthermore that the terms for that
survival will be extremely interesting—even transformative. Art has
always been made in a ghostly and somewhat treacherous economy built on
solidarities and speculations, piracy and ideals: an alternative economy
par excellence. As Lawrence Liang writes in his essay in this issue,


An alternative economy would have to seek a language that does not just
name a different economic process, but names different psychic energies
amidst the prediction of gloom that normally accompanies the retreat of
capital from all forms of life, including creative life. And yet it
remains important to maintain that the mere presence of healthy public
institutions does not guarantee a richer cultural life, just as their
absence does not necessitate a poverty of cultural life.

*_Raqs Media Collective—Planktons in the Sea: A Few Questions Regarding
the Qualities of Time_* <http://e-flux.com/journal/view/243>
Our mortality should be the gold standard of our life’s transactions
with other lives. It is the metal to which we can peg all our
currencies, all our instances of giving and taking to each other. Once
we die, we can neither give nor receive, and all attempts to evade this
fact, whether through inheritances or estates, are basically arbitrary
attempts to pretend that death had in fact not occurred.

Before banks, before currency, valuable things were placed in
circulation as lines of credit whose ultimate end was to return to the
sender having accumulated surplus value. In short, participants gave in
order to increase their holdings, but this interested act created
something more than the interested rational subject-it created moral
obligations and social worlds.

Also in 1977, “competition” became the crucial word for the economy,
whose project was to submit human relationships to the singular
imperative of competition. The term itself became naturalized to the
point where saying “competition” was like saying “work.” But competition
is not the same as work. Competition is like crime, like violence, like
murder, like rape. Competition equals war.

Just as artists are essential to the movement of armies, which gather
around music, uniforms, flags, so does the artist have a pivotal role in
determining the future of money, and the future of the economy. So why
shouldn’t artists create their own money? It will not be Monopoly money,
but anti-monopoly money. It will be real money to the extent that people
trade with it.

Americans against capitalism? Arab nations toppling autocrats through
peaceful protests? 2011 has been a year of massive popular uprisings—on
a completely unexpected scale and from populations that were thought to
have been thoroughly subdued. Commentators have predicted that
discontent in the Arab world would soon come to a head for so many years
that it was beginning to seem unlikely, just as others had begun to
dismiss the political potency of popular demonstrations in fiscalized
Western democracies. For those who started to think that large-scale,
radical optimism was naïve or nostalgic, the events of the past year
should be sufficient to prove them wrong.

But as winter takes hold in many parts of the world, another kind of
doubt begins to set in, with a tinge of disappointment that
circumstances in many places that saw the most intense uprisings have
not actually been significantly transformed for the better. The removal
of dictators has only peeled back the top layer of societies with
endemic problems that must be addressed by a renewed sense of civic
society. The 99% remains at the mercy of the 1%. The military crackdown
in Syria remains unbelievably bloody. An enormous swell of hope that was
felt throughout the world earlier this year now seems like it could be
orphaned by setbacks, by the scale of brutal realities that seemed as if
they were starting to crack open.

The weight of these unforeseen challenges have produced a peculiar
moment of social upheaval marked by a nagging sense of stasis—a feeling
that, in spite of constant pushing, nothing is in fact moving, or that
we are collectively going in circles. This makes it necessary to
reluctantly face up to a choice that the current situation poses:
whether to religiously believe in a general historical movement towards
a change for the better, or resolve ourselves with the fact that things
will always remain the same. But this is a false binary.

In this issue:
*Franco Berardi Bifo—The Future After the End of the Economy*
<http://e-flux.com/journal/view/269>
So how can semiotic labor be valued if its products are immaterial? How
can the relationship between work and salary be determined? How can we
measure value in terms of time if the productivity of cognitive work
(creative, affective, linguistic) cannot be quantified and standardized?

An occupation keeps people busy instead of giving them paid labor. An
occupation is not hinged on any result; it has no necessary conclusion.
As such, it knows no traditional alienation, nor any corresponding idea
of subjectivity. An occupation doesn’t necessarily assume remuneration
either, since the process is thought to contain its own gratification.
It has no temporal framework except the passing of time itself.
arrest occupiers wearing as little as a folded bandana on the forehead,
leaving little doubt about their fear of Carnival as a potent form of
political protest.

*Grant Kester—The Sound of Breaking Glass, Part I: Spontaneity and
Consciousness in Revolutionary Theory* <http://e-flux.com/journal/view/270>
During periods of political repression, the relationship between
aesthetics and politics, and between private and public expression,
undergoes both erosion and reconsolidation.

Realizing this avant-garde sensibility consists of a change of
perspective within given conditions, not necessarily in the change of
the conditions. It opposes the passive nihilism of society’s death
drive, and the fundamental tendency of the symbolic order to perpetuate
the same through continual displacement. In doing so it contests the
basic conceits of linear time: the fetishization of history, mythologies
that celebrate novelty and dynamic change, and the overriding imperative
toward modernization.


But first, how did this happen? How did a form of
communication—developed in the late 1950s with a well-funded US Defense
Department initiative in response to the Sputnik threat, then blossoming
in the hands of engineer-entrepreneurs in the Silicon Valley of the
1970s into the center of accelerated hyper-capitalism in the
1990s—evolve to become a strange hybrid of a free press, judiciary, and
public market?

capitalism encourages images that project what will inevitably be left
in its wake: a dead world. And just as one can imagine (or see) patches
of devastated and desolate land, a kind of localized post-extraction
desertification, one can just as easily imagine this becoming a
planetary condition: the globe as a rotating, dead lithosphere, coated
in a fine dust of decomposing once-organic particles.


*Once again, to go beyond shallow assumptions of social media’s invasion
of traditional art practices, let me put the question differently: Where
does abstraction and the non-representational intersect with the social?
Or, put the other way around: /What is the limit of the social within
the social itself/?**

*The term “performance” is slippery even within relatively well-defined
contexts. In today’s economy, it not only refers to the productivity of
one’s labor but also to one’s actual, quasi-theatrical
self-presentation, one’s self-performance in an economy where work has
become more dependent on immaterial factors.

/ArtAsiaPacific/ no. 57 blazes ahead into 2008 by investigating themes
of landscapes, paradise and destruction through the work of artists,
curators and initiatives devoted to changing the art map.

This issue begins with /ArtAsiaPacific/ senior editor Don Cohn’s
investigation of the work of Taoist pyrotechnician Cai Guo-Qiang, who
rose to fame with his explosion events at sights around the world, as he
prepared for a landmark survey exhibition at New York’s Guggenheim
Museum. Cai, who was raised in China and also spent a seminal period in
Japan before moving to New York, has transformed the iconic Frank Lloyd
Wright rotunda with a site-specific installation that explodes, as Cohn
envisions, “in orgasmic cataclysm, immediately thereafter reverting to a
/yin/ state of cool repose and achieving a desirable balance in
the process.”

This issue also scales the heights of Tibet in two features. Long-time
China hand Meg Maggio interviews vanguard artist and curator Qiu Zhijie
about the new mode of socially-conscious art he is practicing in China
by taking students from the Hangzhou Academy of Art’s Total Art Studio
on field trips to Tibet, where they created art works and conducted
cultural surveys. In London, meanwhile, a group of expatriate artists
from Tibet gathered for a roundtable with AAP contributing editor Eliza
Gluckman to discuss the current state of art inspired by the place,
mental and physical, known as Shangri-la.

On other frontiers, Gina Fairley explores the social dynamics of
motorcycles and sporting subculture on barren Australian highways
through the work of Shaun Gladwell. Rebecca Catching discusses the work
of video artist Lida Abdul, a participant in the fifth edition of Asian
Contemporary Art Week in New York who is also short-listed for the
suspended by the energy of performance. And in regards to museums, it
wonders what is possible to acquire for future generations, and how
should performance be displayed?The third chapter on 5 April is composed of case studies of different
histories of performance art within the field of visual arts, in
different geographies, throughout the twentieth century. It discusses
how and why these histories are being recuperated, translated and
integrated or on the contrary excluded from the new institutional
realities of contemporary art. Which histories are privileged and which
ones are dismissed? Does the new paradigm of performance need these
histories and are these histories legitimate historical precedents for
this new paradigm? Or is the new performance turn too much a product of
our times and its roots in the performance art of the late avant-garde
too vague? Participants in this section include *KuroDalaiJee*, author
of /Anarchy of the Body/, art historian, Japan, *Georg Schoellhammer*
(Vienna-based editor, author, curator and editor-in-chief of springerin
awe syndrome and generate a kind of interactivity with the viewer.

Walldrawing approaches the wall as collective space. Here we have
variants on a site-specific approach going back to such early or basic
forms of drawing as cave art and graffiti.

Close to caricature, the works of Dan Perjovschi draw directly on
today’s reality, while those of Donald Urquhart are inspired from
underground and nocturn life. Constantin Luser opts for poetic dual-line
projections with an industrial touch to them. Other artists play with
the architecture of the venue, among them Robin Rhode who involves the
public in drawn performances. Petra Mrzyk and Jean-FranCois Moriceau
simulate, on the wall, a gallery of grimacing portraits. Collaborative
work is another current trend, as in the spontaneously explosive fresco
of Maroussia Rebecq and her guests. A luminous counterpoint is provided
by the delicate dreamlike drawings by Vidya Gastaldon. Santiago Cucullu
offers a coloured and ‘mythological’ panorama and Sammy Stein, after
creating his exuberant creatures, transfers them onto stickers that can
infiltrate any place.

Availing itself of the latest developments in computer technology,
animation is now moving into new spaces as part of a cultural current –
videogames, mangas – that has radically changed our relationship to the
drawn moving image. The visual artists chosen for this exhibition bring
a free hand to the usual rules and creative approaches, offering brief,
pseudo-naive narrative formats characterised by experimentation with
hybrid techniques.

Some of the narrative works come in the form of installations taking a
critical look at contemporary society: Paul Chan’s paradise veers into
the apocalyptic, while Kota Ezawa turns a TV program virtual by
stylising it with pop flat tints. The more minimalist Mario Garcia
Torres animates a conceptual statement.

The diversity of the artists chosen allows for a real mix of stylistic
sequences: Benoit Broisat’s tracking-shot through the memory of a city;
the psychedelic, algorithm-rich world of Ryoko Aoki and Zon Ito; Vidya
Gastaldon’s electromagnetic waves; and Camille Henrot’s ghostly filmed
graffiti. Others, like Roberto Cuoghi, tweak the basic aesthetic of the
cartoon and its main protagonists, while Lionel Sabatte does the same
for computer science with his computer-generated clips and Sammy Stein
reworks the Gameboy as the support for an ancestral fable. Working in
black and white, Ana Maria Millan & Andres Sandoval draw on B-movies,
and Virginie Barre et Stephane Sautour reduce horror movies to a few key
elements of mise en scene.

Also intriguing are the correspondences that arise when walldrawings and
animations are confronted in a same place: the drawings line up along
the walls, the films follow each other in a loop. And the result is an
energy that challenges the often narrow definitions of drawing and its
potential for experiment.

As part of his participation in Performa09, the third visual art
performance biennial of New York City, artist Darius Miksys invites the
parents of artists to a group meeting to ponder the unanswerable—how,
why, and when did my child become an artist? The goal of this social
interaction on November 21, 2-4 pm is not to solve this mystery, but
rather to explore the generational move backward as a creative
forward-looking exercise. Miksys is, after all, interested in exploring
communicative models and turning the tables around.

MacArthur Fellow, and Nicolai Ouroussoff, Architecture Critic, /The New
York Times/ as they discuss the rise in importance of regional culture
in the wake of global culture. Location, Location, Location will be
moderated by Richard Flood, Chief Curator, New Museum.
/Location, Location, Location/! Is Provincial a Bad Word? is the second
in a series of Hot Button! panels organized by the New Museum in
association with the School of Art at The Cooper Union for the
Advancement of Science and Art. Hot Button! represents the first
programmatic initiative of the New Museums recently appointed curatorial
team.represent the spirit of an institution dedicated to new art and new
ideas, and ready to embrace debate. Hot Button! panels aim to engage a
broad audience interested in contemporary culture by featuring leading
figures in contemporary art, architecture, cuisine, design and fashion
in frank conversation with each other.
superlative artists who focus on the current crisis in a sustained and
critical manner. Rather than acquiesce to our current calamity, this
exhibition asks if it is not time to push back against the disciplinary
dictates of the capitalist logic and, as if by some artistic sorcery,
launch a rescue of the very notion of the social itself.
expression that grapples with an understanding of both local and
international cultural transformations.
Sense of belonging, nationalism, economy, and global village

/POWER STATION takes the form of public intervention, highlighting
contemporary influences, beliefs, pre/misconceptions and belonging.
Power, in various forms extends its influence to our daily lives yet our
notion of power and its extent of influence is often, perhaps
deliberately, overlooked. The project challenges our understanding of
identity in relation to authority, nation-hood and globalisation. Moving
and interacting within/outside centres of power, be it cultural,
political or financial, POWER STATION aptly questions their authority
and invites reflexivity yet inevitably becoming an accomplice to these
power games./

POWER STATION in Singapore will feature a white van traveling and
stopping at various spots throughout the island. During each stop, the
national anthems of selected countries will emanate from the van, while
badges bearing words such as Art Power, Money Power and Media Power will


Taking place during Singapores inaugural international biennale of
contemporary art, which also coincides with Singapores hosting of the
Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and World Bank Group, these events provide a highly
appropriate context for POWER STATIONs investigations. POWER STATIONs
interventions into the citys political, financial and cultural centres
of power invites the public to re-examine our understanding of identity
in relation to authority, nation-hood and globalisation. Inviting
reflexivity, it pertinently questions the authority of these power
centres while highlighting their significance in framing a sense of
belonging, pride and unity.
meanings of the term power, Cagols engagement with the public underlines
the complexity of power and authority. Neither definitive nor univocal,
the concept of power is infinitely expanded. However, this multiplicity
is subverted by the distribution of badges, once a symbol of rank but
now playfully utilised as an accessory. The broadcasting of anthems of
nations in power juxtaposed with those of the aspiring powers-to-be
hints at the universal appeal for power, at once resisted yet
irresistible. In this way the project highlights how power, as
manifested through the visible centres of respected authority, inhabits
every aspect of contemporary society and is silently rooted in every
individual.

colours. It continued with the support of the Galleria Civica di Arte
Contemporanea di Trento (Civic Gallery of Contemporary Art of Trento,
Italy), Museion Modern and Contemporary Art Museum of Bolzano (Italy)
and Kunstraum of Innsbruck (Austria) with the intervention of Bird Flu
at the 4th Berlin Biennale. Bird Flu is a trip into physical and mental
state of influences, taking an ironical use of the term influenza as a
starting point in suggesting multiple levels of interpretation.

Keen on finding the missing link between Baldessari’s pure beauty and
Deleuze’s theory of the anomalous? Or perhaps argue that Matta-Clark’s
building intersections can be twice as fun if you’re reading an essay on
MACBA’s pristine building? Or maybe just create a playlist of all the
MACBA’s mp3 lectures you are planning to listen this weekend... Either
way, when it comes to the /Itineraries/ it’s really up to you to curate,
collect, and provide the meta-reading on MACBA’s rich digital heritage.


Every year, the exhibition calendar of the Botín Foundation opens with
this joint exhibition, where the use by the artists of these nine months
of intense creativity is assessed, showcasing a faithful view of their
latest artistic proposals. A diversity of origins, work places,
techniques, and concerns come together at the youngest and freshest
offering displayed in the exhibition halls of the Botín Foundation. 

technologies as a fundamental tool for the visibilisation and
normalisation of those communities in the globalised world.

*João Onofre* has created a simple and universal image: a tiny island
that slowly floats along and gets lost on the horizon; a drifting refuge
for those who disagree with the turn the world has taken.

*David Zink Yi* uses his work to explore cultural traditions from a
horizontal and intimate perspective, both with groups and communities
and with precise social and historical situations.

Over the years this group exhibition has come to be the crowning event
of the grant awards, exhibiting the works produced during this period
and providing a close-up panorama of today’s most cutting-edge artistic
practice. The catalogue, including a text written by Miguel von Hafe,
reviews the projects of each of the artists.

*Ruben Grilo* (b. 1981, Lugo) 
/El cuadro y el buzón/ (The Painting and the Letter Box) is the result
of research carried out in various places in England and the USA into
the figure of Samuel Slater and the origins of American conceptual art
in the 1960s. The project has led, moreover, to a number of works in
which, with the objective of reconciling research work and artistic
work, accentuate the relationships between both contexts and endeavour
to reveal a degree of reciprocity while avoiding furnishing a lineal
interpretation of the project.

*Clara Montoya* (b. 1974, Madrid) 
/Superficie/ (Surface) aims to continue the line of work the artist

*Juan Luis Moraza* (b. 1960, Vitoria-Gasteiz) 
Under the title of /Republica, /Moraza arranges a constellation of
intersections—the pending and the upcoming, the necessary and the
impossible, the common and the individual, and the local and the
planetary. The artistic media assemble the content in response to two
questions or matters: the matter of configuration and the matter of
representation. Both of these matters are concentrated in the
commitments and requisites of the work brought to life in the sculptural
suite on show in /Itinerarios/. 

*Rodríguez-Méndez *(b. 1968; As Neves, Pontevedra) 
Rodríguez-Méndez is interested in sculpture, action and words as forms
to be utilized to interfere in their semantics, thus creating expanded
works that develop beyond the confines of their installation and form.
Accordingly, he seeks to question the process of construction and
delimitation of spaces and supports with these works. By employing
several different languages and disciplines in his projects, unconnected
from the influence of the exhibition space, he analyses the material
principles intrinsic to the sculptures and to the essential and physical
experience of man. He usually produces series, as repetition seems to
contain all the inconsistencies of any work.

public. Valverde’s work explores a sculptural particularity which
affects architecture and its audiences, as well as the performativity
and/or hermeneutics of both. The piece may in fact be an act of defiance
against the lack of vision and lack of consideration with regard to
spatial events and cultural goods in these volatile times of a crisis of
values.

Between 28 March and 31 May, the Fundación Botín exhibition hall in
Santander will be hosting the 21st edition of the /Itinerarios /exhibit,
an annual showcase that is now celebrating its 21st anniversary as a
virtual gauge for the state of the arts and which year after year offers
a virtual snapshot of the predominant trends in the field, both within
Spain and abroad. 

Since 1994, the Fundación Botín’s Visual Arts Grant programme has
accommodated 168 artists from around the world, many of who have now
made prominent names for themselves in the field. The aim of the
This edition of /Itinerarios/ explores the notion of the art piece as an
“interface” or a medium that enables the user to visualise a process.
For decades, artists have been questioning the idea of the art piece as
a product, beyond its exhibition in different venues. They toy with the
notion that perhaps the most important aspect of any artistic process
resides in the different phases of research and production, as opposed
to the traditional concept of the finished work of art that is ready to
be received and consumed. 

As forms go, the readymade is a slippery one. Its originator, Marcel
Duchamp (1887–1968), spoke of it as “a form of denying the possibility
of defining art.” Now, as the form nears its 100th anniversary—Duchamp
made his /Bicycle Wheel/ in 1913—the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston
presents /It is what it is. Or is it?/, a group exhibition
that//explores /how/ the form has changed. If any one characteristic of
the form is consistent, it is not only formal, but also philosophical.
The readymade unites material concerns with the invisible function of
thought. It avoids participating in what Duchamp called ‘retinal’
culture—the development of a solely visual and stylistic aesthetic in
favor of one that unites material, physical, and formal concerns with
ideas, philosophies, concepts, and feelings. Duchamp’s point, we seem to
agree, was for us to get caught up in a conceptual effort to consider
what we /can and can’t see/, and what happens when we encounter
something familiar in an unexpected way. /It is what it is. Or is it?/
is a dialogue with the readymade form, seeing it not as a collection of
static objects, but as a practice of displacement that turns thought
into form and as physical evidence of conceptual exercise.

/It is what it is. Or is it?/ includes sculpture, painting, photography,
These artists’ works offer us unique
opportunities to address the contemporary legacy of the readymade.
Additionally, the catalogue for this exhibition, designed by Dancing
Foxes Press, gathers previously published texts by Duchamp, Lucy
Lippard, Joseph Kosuth, and Claire Fontaine to establish a direct
relation to the process of recontextualization that the readymade
engages in. Together, these artists chart our changes in perception,
demonstrating that artistic practice has become notably more politicized
and engaged in addressing a diversity of social, aesthetic, and temporal
realities.

Against establishing cohesive thematic groupings of artworks, /It is
what it is. Or is it?/ is a speculative proposition that considers how
artists are using and making readymades today and how we can learn
something from them about a contemporary state of being. The readymade,
and its multiple legacies, demand that we be active viewers. /It is what
it is. Or is it?/ culls together different, even unexpected, approaches
to the readymade to insist upon its relevance as a method, practice, and
approach for artists today. The exhibition is organized by Dean Daderko,
Curator, Contemporary Arts Museum Houston.

and runs until October 23 at the Cheonggyecheon Plaza in Seoul, Korea.
This cooperative exhibit aims to capture the dynamic and shifting spirit
of Seoul where all three museums are located. Cheonggyecheon Project is
the first part of the /Museum Link/ Exhibition by the three museums
after which follows three exhibits by the respective participating
museums. The exhibit emphasizes difference and diversity by accepting
the museums’ distinct voices rather than trying to show their
commonality in a single exhibit.

overbearing convictions of a noisy, complicated, and ultimately
fascinating city.

The “Itjanayo” (Korean “Itjanayo,” meaning “well,” “um,” “see,” or “by
the way”) project by architect and artist Soo-in Yang will be set in the
Cheonggyecheon Plaza, an old-new space that has been reinvented and
renewed in many iterations much like Seoul itself. Installed in front of
Claes Oldenburg’s /Spring, Itjanayo/ is a box of mirrors seen from the
outside, but becomes a viewing and recording box from the inside, when
people enter into the box and start to state their opinions. Throughout
history, a plaza has been a place for airing statements of opinion,
historical statements are limited by time and forgetfulness, but the
statements inside /Itjanayo/ are recorded and replayed for others to
hear. Others who subsequently enter the box can add responses to the
earlier statements as though they were adding online comments.

The Cheonggyecheon Project, taking place against the backdrop of
overlapping memories and images that characterize a complex city, will
be an experiment on whether people can communicate through art.

The project is accompanied by the essay of Korean novelist Yeon-Su Kim
whose unique viewpoint and insights have come to represent the struggles
and aspirations of the oughts.

writers of the same post-cultural revolution generation gather in a
provincial hotel to discuss at length (defying both the fast-paced
temporality of our time and every convention on the viewer’s attention
span in mainstream cinema) their views on the place of poetics in
contemporary China. The intellectuals take their time to visit various
issues connected to China’s massive transformation over the last
decades, with all its implications for history and the individual, for
society and for art, from the most obvious to the most obscure. But what
could have been a self-serving illustration of an exercise in artistic
withdrawal is unsettled by the unexpected introduction of fiction and
the personal in the detached, documentary style of the piece. In a
different manner, Philippe Grandrieux’s portrait of Japanese filmmaker
and revolutionary Masao Adachi (the source of the exhibition’s name) is
centered around the exploration of Adachi’s inner self and avoids thus
to be an exercise of melancholy on the ruins of the international left.
Active in Japan’s avant-garde film scene of the 1960s and a member of
the Japanese Red Army, Masao Adachi provides a deeply moving
introspection of a life lived mostly outside mainstream society (he was
exiled in Lebanon for more than two decades) and with firm beliefs on
art’s possibilities. The decision to not enter the production logics of
the art system is to be read in Mladen Stilinović’s 1993 manifesto “The
Praise of Laziness.” His ‘laziness’ (augmented by the images of him
sleeping in the 1978 piece Artist at work) is in fact an active process
of critical statements about art and the self-perpetuating bureaucracy
around it, both under the socialist and the capitalist systems. Patrizio
di Massimo’s series of portraits of various characters, ranging in style
from a fantastical realist painting to lush abstract velvet curtains
bring to the foreground of the exhibition artistic subjectivity as a
dominant specter in the crafting of artistic vocabularies. Desire
(inconspicuous in the prudish panorama of today’s art) insinuates itself
at every fold in the piece and completes the exhibition’s narrative. /It
May Be That Beauty Has Strengthened Our Resolve /is curated by Cosmin
Costinas.
consisting of 16-feet-tall pipe, a pump, and a basin. In each
installation, a fluid is circulating continuously. The fluids, including
red wine, liquid soap, olive oil, ink, and coffee, drop in one massive
jet from the pipe’s opening into the basin; given the extreme total
height of the installation, they drop straight down as much as ten feet.
The structure as a whole, then, is a rather impressive spatial
installation, radiating massive power. Pivi has a reputation for
realizing large-scale projects that highlight absurd aspects of our
everyday world, confronting the viewer with unanticipated and
spectacular situations. Her works place well-known objects in unusual
contexts, imparting to them a modified meaning and function, thus
exhibiting cultural and social conventions. Paola Pivi realizes
conceptions and ideas of structures the viewer would not ordinarily get
to see. The spectacular is here balanced with a certain Romantic notion
of an inversion of all things. During the past few years, Pivi has been
represented at important international group shows such as the 1999 and
2003 Venice biennials. In early 2007, Paola Pivi first presented her
work in the German-speaking world with a major solo exhibition at
Kunsthalle Basel.

Lecture by Paola Pivi

at Städelschule Academy Frankfurt
Sculptural Department
*How will future designers work, and how does Danish design address
global issues such as sustainability, new technology and consumption?
The exhibition it’s a small world challenges the Danish design tradition
and explores future design practices in a global perspective.*

*It’s a small world* is organised as a collaboration between Danish
Design Centre, Danish Crafts and Danish Architecture Centre. The
exhibition is initiated by the Danish Ministry of Economic and Business
Affairs and the Danish Ministry of Culture.

*It’s a small world* focuses on Danish design, craft and architecture in
relation to a new international design agenda and examines the role of
design as problem-solver in a world filled with surplus production and
an endless supply of products. Global challenges such as sustainability
and, not least, the growing demand for individual, non-standardised
solutions, make both specialisation and flexibility key concerns at
every stage of the design process. The interaction between individual
preferences and global needs is the background for the debate.

The exhibition presents six scenarios, each introducing a unique concept
that explores cultural trends from an individual as well as a collective
point of view, in a local and global perspective.

critical manner. Rather than acquiesce to the current calamity, this
exhibition asks if it is not time to push back against the disciplinary
dictates of the capitalist logic and, by use of artistic means, launch a
rescue of the very notion of the social itself.

The exhibition includes documentarian approaches, such as works by Julia
*Christensen*, who explores the transformation of defunct Big Box stores
throughout the U.S. as an example of the resilience and resourcefulness
of those affected most by the crisis. A piece by Yevgeniy *Fiks*, Olga
*Kopenkina*, and Alexandra *Lerman*, documents those who were at the
root of the crisis (Wall Street traders and corporate employees)
participating in discussions on Lenin and his ideas on Imperialism.
Films by Jan Peter *Hammer* and Melanie *Gilligan* reflect the artists’
fictionalized takes on the crisis, by drawing historical paralells and
showing the microcosmic point of view of those directly involved,
respectively.


/How do you generate a sense of responsibility? What is the response
today to a request that we are responsible towards another or towards
their different world-view? How could we act differently in the roles of
producers and/or consumers of culture? What are the ways of playing a
more active role in this process?/

Via the active participation of individuals, institutions,
non-governmental organisations and other actors within the local and
international artistic, cultural and activist scene, the 52nd October
Salon will provide a lively place for the exchanging of knowledge and a
forum for dealing with issues pertaining to the complex positions of
both the individual and the collective. The complex relations between
societies, understanding, observance and protection of universal human
values, personal responsibility—all of these are necessary elements for
re-examinating the political part of our lives.
*Galit Eilat* (IL/NL) is a writer, theorist, curator and one of the
founders of the Israeli Centre for Digital Art, Holon. She is one of the
editors-in-chief of /Maraav/, an Internet magazine for art and culture,
and is currently working as a research curator at the Van Abbemuseum in
Eindhoven (NL). Her projects often deal with the political situation in
the Middle East, the themes of activism, (responsibility) and political
imagination.


*Itziar Okariz* shows a new installation entitled /*Ghost Box */produced
specifically for *sala rekalde*. The installation comprises various
sound and film captures recorded during a series of actions carried out
by the artist in the Killarney lakes, a natural park in the south of
County Kerry in the west of Ireland. This area is noted for its
remarkable topography, since it consists of a chain of rocky mountains
and three lakes. This is a natural enclave where some of the most
extraordinary echoes in the world can be heard.

In her series of works entitled /Irrintzi/. Repetition (2006-2008),
*Itziar Okariz* explores the acoustics particular to a number of
different locations, in actions that she performs and records on video.
The /irrintzi/ is a system of communication at the limits of language, a
traditional Basque call that the artist employs with ambivalence in her
actions vis-à-vis the connotations of national identity and specific
cultural forms of jubilation and exaltation on special occasions. This
is the case of previous works such as /Irrintzi. Repetition 90, 91, 92,
93, 94, 95, 96 (2006), Irrintzi. Repetition Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
(2007) and Irrintzi. Repetition. Bowery, New York/ (2008) where the
artist uses this cry as rough material for her performances, firstly
removing it from its original context and then confronting it with new
referents.

To accompany the exhibition, *sala rekalde* will publish a book that
documents this new production by the artist. The catalogue includes
texts by curator Leire Vergara, by philosopher Beatriz Preciado and by
independent curator Moritz Küng.

During the same dates, *The Abstract Cabinet* of *sala rekalde* will
host the project */Here and now! New forms of feminist action./* This
exhibition is proposed as a space for encounter, reflection, debate and
resistance around ways of doing that incorporate feminist thought, queer
politics and postcolonial discourses in artistic practice. The
exhibition focuses on different editorial practices developed
internationally within the format of fanzines, magazines, and other
kinds of editorial proposals. The publications included in the show such
as *Cuntstunt, Iconoclasistas, Artísimas, Tomboi, Malmoe, Prolongue,
Grrrrl Zine Network, Girl Like Us, Mujeres Públicas, Belcro, O.R.G.I.A.,
Regina* and *Pripublikarrak* among many others fit within the parameters
of DIY, at the junction between editing, artistic practice, feminism and
collaboration

*Erreakzioa-Reacción*, a collective formed by artists Azucena Vieites
and Estíbaliz Sádaba, arose in 1994 as a space for developing projects
between art, education and knowledge production around feminism. This
group has constituted a pioneering initiative in Spain, as their
fanzines introduced key texts and practices in a time that feminism was
still entering Spanish Academia.

In addition to Visitor two more works will be shown. The impressive
Study of my Father (2004) shows alternate images of the well-trained
body of his father and photographs of demonstrations and buildings torn
down by bombardments. The artist thus confronts his own origin. The
video work Beauty of Believing (2005) has been commissioned by Stroom
Den Haag; the temporary architecture of a stage, the carrier of either
political ideologies or meaningless entertainment, forms the scenery for
a meeting where commemoration and collective oblivion seem to coincide.

How does official history relate to personal history? How many
individual complications do the rules of political historiography allow?
Grubanov describes his working method as mapping myself into complex
historical situations. He usually choses a subjective, documentary
approach; there is always a certain ambivalence with regard to the
subject. He avoids superficial points of view, opinions or unambiguous
emblematic images. At the same time the artist also questions himself:
how far can identification and self-reflection go?
Ivan Grubanov (Belgrade, 1976) belongs to the generation of young
Serbian artists who grew up in a strictly confined society. They
rebelled against the regime of Milosevic and demanded freedom of
expression, open communication with the world around them, and room for
new experiments in the visual arts. In these circumstances Grubanov
became aware of his role in society and of his responsibilities, feeling
national-state representation, one might instigate a discourse on the
meaning of the term “nation” in post-global age, when the national state
retreats before the trans-national and supra-national forms of
organizing—conglomerates, political, military and economic alliances
which represent huge concentrations of power and influence. 

Ivan Grubanov (b. 1976 in Belgrade) received education at the Painting
Department of the Belgrade Academy of Fine Arts, the Rijksakademie van
beeldende kunsten in Amsterdam, Delfina Studios in London, Casa de
Velazquez in Madrid and University of Leuven – KU Leuven. Grubanov’s
ideas and his work achieve independence over political speech through
artistic and critical interpretation of historical memory, and thus
evade the unwanted banalization of artistic speech. They negate the
concept of the work of art as a closed, static aesthetic object, while
maintaining the identity of an autochthonous analytical and critical
post-painterly practice of the open system of interpretation.represents six decades of his complex artistic oeuvre and is the most
comprehensive survey exhibition to date to be devoted to the sculptor
outside of his native Croatia. 

Kožarić has always kept the character of his works open. He reworks
earlier pieces, reprocesses earlier ideas, and intentionally dates works
inaccurately or incorrectly. To do justice to this openness, the
exhibition is organized according to thematic connections within his
work, rather than to chronology, style, or development.

The central theme of the sculptures from the 1950s is the human figure,
of which there are numerous depictions including torsos, heads, and
portraits. At the same time, Kožarić also experimented with abstract
shapes and ideas, which were to become more important in later years in
pieces like /Osjećaj cjeline/ (Feeling of Wholeness, 1953/54). In his
work, Kožarić intuitively challenged the distinctions between the
figurative and the abstract rejceting the necessity of any exclusive
determination.

At the end of 1959, Kožarić spent six months in Paris, where he created
the sculpture /Unutarnje oči /(Inner Eyes, 1959/60), an oval face out of
which two rods reach toward the viewer like eyes. This sculpture
introduced the artist’s increasing preoccupation with negative volume
and an inward directed view. 

Kožarić’s /Oblici prostora/ (Shapes of Space) were designed as replicas
of urban cavities and voids—negative volumes that were transformed into
positive forms. In 1963, Kožarić wrote, “Plaster casts should be made of
… the interiors of several important cars, the interior of bed-sitters,
trees, the interior of a park, etc., the interiors of all-important
cavities in our city.” Conversely, the result—largely abstract, rounded
shapes—is the sculptural realization of the idea of emptiness.

For an exhibition in late 1993/early 1994 at a gallery in Zagreb,
Kožarić moved the contents of his entire studio into the gallery, where
he lived and worked for the exhibition period. This studio was presented
at Documenta 11 in 2002. Since 2007, when the City of Zagreb acquired
the work and bequeathed it to the local museum of contemporary art,
Kožarić has initiated several transformations of the space, which
contains approximately 6,000 works. About 360 works from the Kožarić
studio will be presented in the exhibition, supplemented by loans from
major public and private collections.

/Ivan Kožarić. Freedom Is a Rare Bird/ is organized by Haus der Kunst in
cooperation with the Museum of Contemporary Art Zagreb.

*Coming soon:*

At the 53rd International Art Exhibition – La Biennale di Venezia *Chile
will be represented by the work of artist Iván Navarro.*

For the Venice show, Iván Navarro has created a group of works in a
socio-political perspective – a theme woven into all his work.

The artist formalises his /Threshold/ work in three separate
elements/moments.

/_Death Row_/ is composed of thirteen aluminium doors with a neon light
inside. This creates an optical hiatus in the space, producing an effect
of corridors going through a wall.

Ives Maes photographs any architectural remains of these short-lived
events and the sites on which they were built, often revealing an ironic
contrast between the grand futuristic ideals of the time and the urban
reality of the modern world. The exhibition pavilions expressed a
utopian vision of promise for the future.
cooperation with Ghent City Archive).

These series of presentations and discussions will seek to trace the
paradoxes faced by the art historical practice when it seeks to capture
and interpret contemporary art in its permanent flux and fragmentation.
The forum will also address the subject of multiple art histories, their
endurance as valid narratives, and the ways through which these become
the object of revisions.

Our understanding and appreciation of history (be it national, personal,
or universal) as artists, curators, critics and art viewing audience, is
complex and critical in our process of relating to the art of our time.
It is this understanding that informs a wide range of attitudes about
art and also influences art policy, economics, social and political thought.

Whereas history may be seen either as a lineal or multi-lineal
narrative, and whether it is constructed through descriptions of
movements, groups, phases or “isms”, it is impossible to bypass the need
of a historical narrative of a certain nature, and to try to escape our
own placement within that history. The understanding of the processes
through which we make, interpret, remake and reinterpret history is
vital to understand the very process of art making and the ongoing
construction of our identity as a society.
The Institute of Puerto Rican Culture (ICP) is pleased to announce the
opening of its IV Poly/Graphic Triennial: San Juan, Latin America and
the Caribbean on October 24, 2015 to March 28, 2016. Gerardo Mosquera,
Chief Curator, is joined by Vanessa Hernández Gracia and Alexia Tala.
Following the Triennial’s fundamental tenet of exploring an expanded and
inclusive notion of the graphic image, this IV edition will explore the
displacements of this image and its exit from its traditional supports
to the gallery space and to the public realm.

It has been said that we live in the age of the image, and this age is
also that of the displaced image. The current ubiquity of images has led
to their multiple transformations. These shifts have occurred in many
ways: images move and transform between worlds, techniques, media,
contexts, and cultures. They are appropriated and re-signified, while
being recycled for new uses, sometimes being quite dissociated from the
• A rich presentation of Cai Guo-Qiang’s aesthetic iconography which is
inspired by ancient mythology, military history, Taoist and Buddhist
philosophy, cosmological science, pyrotechnic technology, Chinese
medicine, and contemporary global conflict.

In /I Want to See/ (2008), Catherine Deneuve, playing herself, asks
actor Rabih Mroué, also playing himself, to show her the aftermath of
the 2006 Lebanon war. As they drive towards the border and share the
anxiety of the surrounding danger, a half-spoken complicity develops
between them. Deneuve both denies and takes advantage of her status as a
cinema icon to lend a fresh glance as well as to gain physical access to
a landscape exploited and saturated by the media.
distribute out-of-copyright sound recordings and a platform for
collaborations exploring the archive material and its potential.
Focusing on /Struggle in Jerash/, the work on show at Gasworks, the
following discussion will address the politics of reanimating archive
material and how their artistic methods were adapted to the Jordanian
context.
Instigating dialogue between about ten internationally-renowned artists
whose works figure in the CNAP collections, and the Musée Guimet
cultural heritage collections,/I went /takes visitors on a meditative
journey. Werner Bischof, Christian Boltanski, Jean Clareboudt,
Marie-Ange Guilleminot, Hans Hartung, On Kawara, Rei Naito, Pascal
Pinaud, Ian Stallard, Xavier Veilhan….visit all realms of creative work
to share their visions and inspirations from Asia.

The presented artworks will re-read Asian tradition with its continual
fascination for the sacred, the absolute, philosophies and journeys.
These meditative itineraries take place essentially in the museum’s
Japanese collections, offering three distinct orientations: gesture and
calligraphy, architecture and volumes, rituals and memory.

exhibition is integral to the artwork; artist On Kawara embeds this in
his work, just as for the decade of 1968–1979 he recorded his daily
movements on maps of the cities he traversed. Marking his movements in
red on the city maps attested to the artist’s physical presence,
systematically and almost ritually. Japanese artist Rei Naito will
continue this contemplative exploration with the artwork /Pillow for the
Dead/: organza “pillows for the dead” illustrating our final voyage
delicately, ephemerally, recalling the ancestral traditions surrounding
the dead.

*The Guimet Museum
*For four years, the Guimet Museum—Europe’s richest collection of Asian
arts—now grants a space to contemporary art through partnerships with
other institutions or galleries, creating specific events. By displaying
contemporary pieces close to ancient artefacts within patrimonial
exhibitions or permanent collections, the museum underlines the
importance between past and present civilisations from the
Extreme-Orient and Occident.

Adapting itself to the evolution of world’s culture, the Guimet museum
as a living place organizes cultural events connected to Asian cultures:
film reviews, concerts, dance shows and theatre…
artists are working at the crossroads between music and the visual arts.
Which strategies characterise these works? Which effects do they attempt
to evoke? And how do they relate to the extensive legacy of aural and
visual experiments of the 20th century avant-garde? The exhibition
resulting from these investigations includes more than 80 artworks
ranging from painting, drawing, sculpture and installations, to
photography, video and pure sound and focuses, with a few exceptions, on
recent production. The musical input ranges from classical to rock, pop
and independent but most of all the exhibition underlines how music and
visual arts can be melted into a unique artistic vocabulary. Thus being
a lively approach to the classical theme of a paragon of the arts, the
emblematic example being the title-giving painting, /I Wish This Was A
Song/ by British artist Tim Ayres.

Music is an important element in popular culture. It plays a role for
the identity of people and social relationships. Like visual art it is
culturally rooted, but it is also universal and independent of other
language codes. Music and lyrics of songs can be poetry, manifestoes,
political discourses; they can be gentle courting messages or
declarations of conflict, entertaining or thought-provoking. Like an art
work which makes you dwell in colours or dance around its forms, a piece
of music can break all rational resistance and take you on a journey of
sensual sensations. Like an art installation, an experimental music
piece can build up an imaginary space with an almost architectonic
quality or fill it up with sculptural presence. It is therefore no
surprise that music has been appropriated by artists as part of their
creative and expressive strategies, by playing with its qualities and
valences as a raw material. Whilst parts of the exhibition will actually
set the visitors into motion, others will halt them in contemplation.
Mute instruments are turned into sculptures and installations invite us
to imagine music with our eyes. Exploring the different artistic
strategies that are employed to capture music in visual arts, the
exhibition is organized in seven chapters:/Looking to the classics, Move
it! //Performative Sculpture, Sing Along, Sounds of Silence, Synesthesia
/and an extensive/Live /program throughout the course of the exhibition/./


Fast opens his film with an interview with the drone operator as he
recounts his combat experiences of flying over Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Speaking mostly off-camera, the drone operator details the psychological
impact of engaging an enemy from thousands of miles away. Switching
between documentary interview footage and fictionalized re-enactments,
Fast creates a multifaceted and unstable sense of reality. Combined with
surreal shots of suburban Nevada, the film offers a subtle exploration
of how the use of drones is rapidly changing the politics, principles
and personal experience of contemporary conflict. 

Fast’s critical perspective on the shifting nature of contemporary
warfare blurs the lines between fiction and reality, truth and memory,
combat and everyday life, demonstrating the ethical complexity of one of
the most hotly debated topics on the media agenda. 

The “Views” jury honors Iza Tarasewicz for “the artist’s consistence in
shaping her own, mature and original artistic language; for exploring
matter and primal processes; for reviving art’s cognitive dimension.”
Iza Tarasewicz (b. 1981) is a sculptor, draughtswoman, and performer.
Her objects and their arrangement elude the opposition between the
natural and the artificial. As part of complex practices of
interpreting, collecting, deconstructing, and reorganizing material,
social, historical, and ideological systems, she attentively tests and

By revisiting past “Views” exhibitions and their commissioned
contributions, the invited artists will mainly focus on “updating” the
pieces commissioned at that time as well as their artistic practices.
This process will enable the artists to highlight the most interesting
phenomena and urgent problems they deal with. /Common Affairs/ will
present artistic perspectives on the shifts and changes in the Polish
and the international art scene, from the “long nineties” up to the
present day. It will promote positions that deal with the history and
politics of memory and representation, with transformation and
approaches to change.

throughout his 30-year career, highlighting the artist’s formal and
technical innovations. The exhibition includes the flamboyantly baroque
/Don Quijote Segunda Parte/, a sculpture in the polychromatic anodized
aluminum technique pioneered by the artist; his colorful /Maids of
Honor/, a groundbreaking painting on rubber curtains; and his early
encaustic wire mesh paintings.

The “Veils’” ghostly imagery takes viewers on a journey that draws from
Patkin’s life, which intersects with significant social and geopolitical
events, including the AIDS crisis and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
As an expatriate navigating various changing cultural realities, Patkin
is as wary of globalism as he is of nationalism. His works encapsulate
the fleeting nature of our existence. For Patkin, we are, like his
paintings, veils in a landscape, alternately hiding and revealing.

representative of the Estonian exposition at la Biennale di Venezia.
 

The exhibition, which is the first major survey of Yeats work to take
place in Ireland in almost forty years, compares his work of the 1920s,
when he was firmly rooted in reality, with the wildly apocalyptic
visions and romanticism of his later period.

Yeats was in his thirties before he began to work regularly in oil
paints and his early experiments in the medium remained realistic in
style. His early subject matter was generally concerned with the
documentation of a changing Ireland of that time, and reveals a
fascination with the rituals of everyday life from political events to
funerals, races and circuses. However throughout the 1920s a profound
development came in Yeats’ style. His handling of paint became much more
free, his brushstrokes more loose and his outlines more and more
blurred. It is interesting to note that his subject matter remained
essentially the same throughout this change, but became imbued with a
new, more mystical meaning.

The exhibition features two works, which have not been seen in public
previously, and were once in the collection of the author Graham Greene.
/A Horseman Enters a Town at Night/, 1948, is a particularly significant
work. Executed in dark paint, with flashes of vermillion and cadmium
yellow, this work is considered to be one of Yeats’ masterpieces and The
Model is delighted to premiere its showing in this exhibition.

Many of Yeats’ finest paintings from private and public collections,
including those of The National Gallery of Ireland, Crawford Art Gallery
experts, his oeuvre remains largely unknown to a broader public.

His extraordinary oeuvre stands out for its diversity and individuality:
It embraces performance, film, recording, painting, visually-presented
aphorisms and texts. For his critical exploration of the images of
Western culture conveyed by the media he drew on techniques and images
from the culture industry and advertising. For documenta 7 Goldstein
wrote an aphoristic essay for the catalog, which begins with the
assertion that “media is sensational”. This sentiment runs like a red
thread through his work and is specifically a leitmotif of his
paintings. In the 1980s Goldstein was considered one of the most
promising artists of the Post-Pop Art movement alongside Richard Prince,
Sherrie Levine, Robert Longo and David Salle.
Working in New York from the 1950s until his death in 1989, Smith
unequivocally resisted and upturned accepted conventions, whether
artistic, moral or legal. Irreverent in tone and delirious in effect,
Smith’s films, such as the notorious /Flaming Creatures/ (1963), are
both wildly camp and subtly polemical. Smith is best known for his
contributions to underground cinema but his influence extends across
performance art, photography and experimental theatre.

Also featured in the exhibition are 30 works on paper made by Pollock
during the same period as the black paintings. Made with enamel and ink
and watercolor, the works on paper are considered by scholars to be the
artist’s most important as a draftsman. The exhibition will also feature
five of Pollock’s extant six sculptures, which provide a true
three-dimensional experience of his well-known painting approach.
Together with the 37 paintings on view, these works immerse audiences in
Pollock’s complete oeuvre and shed new light on the experimentation and
ingenuity that has become synonymous with his practice. 

While Jackson Pollock’s leading role in the Abstract Expressionist
movement has been widely discussed, less attention has been devoted to
his black paintings period. In describing this pivotal phase in
Pollock’s artistic trajectory, the critic and historian Michael Fried
remarked that “[Pollock is] on the verge of an entirely new and
different kind of painting...of virtually limitless potential.” The black
paintings assembled for the exhibition will include significant loans
from US, Asian, and European collections, as well as important works
drawn from the collections of the DMA and Tate.
plates, an artist chronology, a black painting chronology, an exhibition
checklist, and a number of, as yet, unpublished photographs by Hans
Namuth of the black paintings.

Tate Liverpool’s summer 2015 season presents three artists whose
practices interrogate the relationship between context and form,
balancing between abstraction and codified signs. Reflecting different
eras and locations, from perspectives both East and West, the season
examines artistic, social and cultural developments occurring in the
post-war period. 
his life seeking to justify its implications. Fearing creative
stagnation, he also sought to reconfigure the celebrated abstract
expressionist style of painting he had pioneered. /Jackson Pollock:
Blind Spots/ explores these developments, tracing the departure, in
1951, from his famed drip technique. Beginning with works made during
the classic drip period, the exhibition explores this much-debated
transition, which resulted in a period in which Pollock would produce
works that came to be known as black pourings, or black paintings.
Figurative, near calligraphic and rendered almost exclusively in black,
art historian Michael Fried believed them to be of “virtually limitless
potential.” Revealing the “blind spots” within an extensive and
expansive practice, the exhibition juxtaposes key phases of Pollock’s
career, and includes lesser-known works—spanning drawing, printmaking
and sculpture—to provide new insights into this pivotal figure’s
contribution to and lasting effect on modern and contemporary art. 

Her first solo exhibition in the UK, this introduction to Geta
Brătescu’s singular vision comprises significant works from 1970 to the
present day and includes a newly commissioned large scale collage for
the entrance of the gallery. Brătescu (born 1926) studied fine art and
literature in Bucharest and developed a practice that encompasses
textiles, printmaking, performance and installation. She places a
particular emphasis on the act of drawing across different media,
stating “for me, the line is the essence.” In recent years, Brătescu’s
distinctive practice has focused on collage, or “drawing with scissors”
as the artist describes it. Her work has remained consistent in her
questioning of identity and our place in the world, and her dedication
to the drawn line. 

/Jackson Pollock: Blind Spots/ is curated by Gavin Delahunty, Hoffman
Family Senior Curator of Contemporary Art, Dallas Museum of Art, with
Based in Sao Paulo, artist Jac Leirner is one of the most emblematic
figures of the Brazilian art scene in the last fifteen years. Most of
the time, she creates sophisticated abstract compositions made out of
our society of consumption’s rejected items. She collects cigarettes
packets, plane tickets, envelopes, leaflets, stickers and museum shops’
plastic bags, all of which she then turns into artworks, thanks to a
patient work of filing and installation. She often finds her materials
during the frantic duration of her journeys; what comes out of it
reflects her enduring interest in visual design and in the ways business
and culture interact.
a new, transnational generation of artists looking to the art of the
1960s and 1970s as a point of departure. Leirner’s meticulously
constructed works carve out a place for commonplace objects, from
cigarette packs and plastic shopping bags to cutlery and currency. In
this, the first in-depth study of Leirner’s creative process, Nelson
interviews the artist about more than two decades of production.
excellence in visual-arts education. The CPPC achieves these goals
through the preservation, presentation, and study of the material
culture of the Ibero-American world—ranging from the ethnographic to the
contemporary. CPPC activities include exhibitions, publications, grants
for scholarly research and artistic production, and the
internationally-recognized education initiative Piensa en arte/Think Art.

The exhibition at Malmö Konsthall of works by Jacob Dahlgren and
Katarina Löfström presents two separate artists. But between their works
interesting encounters arise aesthetic, formal, and in terms of content
not least between the concrete, the representative, and the abstract.
The two artists works are primarily neither theoretical nor conceptual
but /visual/ and emotional. A central aspect of the exhibition is the
way in which things that are apparently simple become through their
transformation by the artist and our own perception (and imagination)
something sensual, poetic and significant. By creating what we
experience as abstract images, the artists on the one hand set us free
from the limiting literalness of pure representation and make possible
narratives (and emotions) with multiple layers of meaning in us, the
observers. On the other hand, the artists also stress the concrete
aspects (materials and form) as well as the fragmentarily
representative, which is their way of simultaneously presenting content
and creating a starting point for our interpretation.
Jacob Dahlgren is a painter and sculptor but he works to a large extent
without the traditional materials of painting and sculpture. Instead,
his abstract works consist of objects which surround us in our everyday
life. They might be coat-hangers, coffee mugs, lamps, or, as in this
exhibition at Malmö Konsthall, a range of different materials. Arranged
(for instance stacked on top of one another), the individual objects
lose their intended function, their original value, and become part of
something completely new. They become materials with which to paint;
they become colours and shapes which form the basis of exciting visual
experiences and a kind of open and democratic aesthetics which
challenges our ingrained ideas. By deliberately misunderstanding one of
Marcel Duchamps famous arguments, we can develop the (possibly a
provocative) idea that Jacob Dahlgrens work at Malmö Konsthall is a form
of painting. For Duchamps simple observation that even the most complex
painting is constructed of pre-existing materials (and is therefore to
be regarded as a readymade), opens up the logical possibility of in fact
being able to paint even with unconventional forms of paint in principle
with anything at all. But one swallow does not make a summer , nor does
one dishcloth make a painting.

Superfluity is a prerequisite if Dahlgrens painterly abstract strategy
is to work. In /Colour reading and contexture/ (2005), it is the absurd
amount of materials which creates the concentration and compactness that
make the work so visually captivating, sensual and interesting in terms
of its form.
Katarina Löfström works with animated videos which relate to painting,
and, in her later works, also to drawing. In her works she combines the
representative and the everyday with the abstract. /Hang Ten Sunset/
(2000), one of the two works shown at Malmö Konsthall, undeniably bears
the legacy of modernisms colour field painting. But Löfström also plays
with another kind of culture. Aided by its title, the work recalls the
flashy decade of the 1980s a surfer society clothed in horizontally
striped T-shirts on a beach in front of a kitschy sunset. Combining in
this way aspects of popular culture with art history and purely visual,
sometimes hypnotic qualities is typical of her work. In An Island
(2004), the starting point is in fact the Stockholm amusement park Gröna
Lund in real life characterised by stress, hubbub and noise but which in
Löfströms work has instead a meditative calm. But what is interesting in
view of these thoughts and ideas are not the references themselves the
playing with history, the praise (or criticism) but rather the fact that
her impure (and not even completely non-figurative) works in a way
achieve what so many of modernisms abstract painters, through their
purism, tried to achieve but better. Liberated from history, theory and
the romanticisation of Art, she embodies their dream of narratives in an
abstract language of colour and form, free to directly express mystical,
spiritual forces and emotions. Katarina Löfström succeeds in
transforming the obscure into something clear, without thereby making it
possible to explain in words.



The canvases have the look of reflecting panels which convey the
ghost-like presence of the underlying paint while absorbing and
rendering the external surrounding space of the piece. The canvases on
the floor, as sculptural elements, are conceived as rejects, surging to
the value of possibility/potential.

Kassay’s work is based on a minimalist /praxis/ where the industrial
process for the production of the art-piece subtracts the quality value
of the artefact to replace it with the value of objectuality, turning it
into something of interchangeable quality.

The conceptual elements of monochrome, the objectification of paint
pigments, the reflection of colour, movement and form, become central in
the artist’s research, and are codified and translated into a new
metaphysics of the painted surface, in a new form of abstraction,
strongly lyrical, where the reference to photography appears evident.

of which is evenly painted and then silver-plated, will be located in
the ICA’s lower gallery. The technique used on the canvases creates
expansive reflective surfaces that come alive with the presence of an
audience.

The movement of ambient colours and changing light subtly and
continuously alter the appearance of the works throughout the day. The
wooden structure releases the canvases from their status as single
units, combining them into a larger composite installation that
functions as both architectural support and environment.

Fraser says the key word to this show is “gorgeous,” an ongoing interest
of hers. In the last year she has been in the Venice Biennale; the
formal voice of these circumlocutions, though, a sense of outrage
simmers, ready to boil over.

Its fury without a target. Or rather, with millions of targets. Over the
years Fraser has carefully pruned her work of any cultural specificity,
at times using multiple languages, other times appending lists of
country names to suggest multiple points of entry. Surprisingly, the
effect has been not globalization but individuation. In their
inscrutability, these works do not convey a universal suffering so much
as they do one womans ongoing struggle to reconcile it with all the
lavish beauty in the world.

incorporating repeating patterns into her work, layering planes of dots,
x’s, emoticons, and canvas weave over and in with expressionistic swaths
of brushstrokes. While her work has often alluded to the image space of
cinema and television, Humphries’s most recent work suggests the stacked
and simultaneous planes of computer screens.

Methodically built up and then scraped, smeared, and painted over again,
the surfaces of Humphries’s paintings are unstable topographies that
alternately cohere and disintegrate, inviting close looking but escaping
total apprehension; the viewer and painting work together in a
continually unfolding experience. As a result, her works are impossible
to truly see online. They demand you be here, now, with them, and that
you really look.  
Commissioned by YBCA, Gordon’s new installation—part of her solo
exhibition /It Only Happens All of the Time/—is an immersive sonic
experience that emphasizes the primacy of the embodied experience; one
that encourages the visitor to navigate the space through a mode of
listening that is both felt and heard.  Gordon explores sound’s ability
to establish different levels of intimacy, and the exhibition’s title
points towards the ubiquitous presence of sound in that process, whether
it exists at the periphery or center of our awareness. The
installation’s sound-absorbing walls reference the design of anechoic
chambers found in military and scientific testing facilities, which
insulate and absorb sound reflections. In contrast to the walls of the
installation, which gestures towards a calculated experience, the
sculpture /Love Seat/ situated within this contained environment
suggests another, more emancipated, arrangement. Surrounded by a
multi-channel speaker system distributed throughout the gallery, /Love
Seat/ encourages visitors to sit and share in a listening experience
with others, while maintaining a physical separation. Fostering an
*Control: Technology in Culture/,/ curated by Ceci Moss, Assistant
Curator of Visual Arts, is YBCA’s new series of exhibitions showcasing
work by emerging and mid-career artists who examine the social,
cultural, and experiential implications of technology. The series seeks
to prompt timely questions about the profound and far-reaching influence
of technology in our daily lives by focusing on artists whose work spans
a multitude of disciplines and relates to a diverse set of issues,
including architecture, acoustics, psychology, labor, consumerism, the
environment, and the military.
and multidisciplinary practice grapples with a wide range of themes
including morality, religion, sex, death, philosophy, the history of
art, and consumer culture. While provocative and deliberately
confrontational, their work is also deeply critical, challenging us to
acknowledge what is uncomfortable and messy through irreverence and dark
humour. 
The overwhelming scale of these scenes is outdone
only by the incredible detail and painstaking labour evident here and in
other works by the Chapmans. /The Chapman Family Collection/ (2002)
parodies traditional museum displays and ethnographic museal practices.
This selection of bronze sculptures merges the fetishization of
ethnographic objects with McDonald’s characters—symbols of the
commercial world—in order to reveal the underlying hypocrisy of
globalization, colonialism, and commercialization. 

Named after Elem Klimov’s 1985 film, /Come and See/ provides an
opportunity to behold an impressive array of works by these prolific
artists. Above all, however, it is an invitation to keep our eyes open,
to bear witness, to question and, perhaps, even to delight.

deconstruct the idea of Dada as a style and so in effect de-Dadaise
Dada. After a research in the Dada archives of the Kunsthaus in Zurich,
the artists came to the conclusion that Dada can never be rectified. The
only thing that can be done today is to either illustrate Dada or
de-Dadaise it, meaning that all the elements contained in the Dada ideal
would have to be put back together again. Hence the Brothers have left
Dada with a headache. They have created a tilt situation that leads
towards the death of Dada through an act of hyper-affirmation that
extinguishes both our Dadaist past and Dadaist present. In effect the
Brothers fight fire with fire.

The sublime rectification of an original Brueghel presents another set
of aesthetic and cultural problems. A work that speaks to the legacy of
an iconoclastic Dadaist past, the Chapman Brothers parasitic approach to
making art, such as their interventions with Goya, Hogarth and more
From beginning to end, the notion of
animism provides an allegorical relationship to that of the human
condition. Irvine leads us on an experiential journey without dictating
a position, letting the scenes interweave with the logic of our journey
through the new exhibition spaces of SMART Project Space.

Starlings are swirling in flocks and oscillating against a blue sky. The
small specks of black create a community of form, a single body of
communication, riding the currents of air where individuals cluster then
disperse as a unified body of flapping wings.

Each film within the eight channels of /The Silver Bridge/ presents
another window into the world. The tangible narrative structure uses
oblique and at times surreal form to forge connections between scenes,
incidents, or the momentary isolation of an image; the blinking of a
womans eyes when slowed to the speed of a nature documentary, or wild
deer grazing with careless confidence in a forested terrain interrupted
by the presence of stark white doors going nowhere, promising nothing.
The awkwardness pervading each scene is emblematic of the broader
intention of the work; bats, captured in the artificial confines of a
zoo terrain crawl across the ground, claws grappling at earth, wings
scratching in the undergrowth; the diminishing form of a woman in black
crawling along the decayed limbs of an old silver bridge, making slow,
uncomfortable progress. This repeated positioning of individual and
communal social behaviour through the worlds of animals, birds and
humans are the touch-stones for the viewers journey through the work and
through Irvines layered and obtuse narrative. As one progresses through
the exhibition spaces, the unifying evocation of what it is to return to
a place seeps to the surface. By coming home, a self-conscious awareness
of exterior perceptions is confronted with an interior knowledge of
self, implying that all return is a negotiation with the past – with
what has changed and with what apparently remains the same. Like walking
through somewhere familiar yet different, one is both at home and a
stranger, at ease but also awkward, or estranged.

As the cycle completes, two women hanging bat-like from the silver
bridge are locked in an embrace, finding a brief moment of balance
somewhere between memory and fantasy before losing it again.

As dusk settles over the luminously glowing old bridge, only one
solitary figure remains hanging, sheltered but alone.
Jaki Irvine currently lives and works in Dublin, having spent many years
in London and in Italy. Her works are single or multi-screen videos that
explore with a melancholic and dreamlike humour the interaction between
the natural world and the built environment, fuelled by a fascination
with the human condition.
hallucinatory journey into his strange and often frightening universe.
Skeletons battle soldiers in murky swamps; towers of eyeballs goggle
cartoonishly; flesh peels wetly off bare bones. Ziółkowski has an
unflinching attitude to the corporeal: the body takes centre stage, at
once defiled and dissected.

Ziółkowski’s vision parallels a collision between the fantasy planet of
Hieronymus Bosch and the grotesque cartoonish world of Philip Guston,
viewed through the lens of the artist’s extraordinary imagination.
Influenced by the folk tales and the often dark history of his native
country, and by contemporary culture, Ziółkowski’s references are
wide-reaching: from the Ancient Greeks to André Masson to Frank Zappa.
Ziółkowski’s measured and often delicate command of his medium belies
his sinister subject matter. His paintings resonate with an unnerving
atmosphere, which speaks profoundly of the darker side of human nature.

/The characters framing the happenings in space are just as important as
the event itself... sometimes the frame is even more crucial. Look closer
for details and suggestions of time passing, finding freedom within

Jalal Toufic is a thinker whose influence in the Beirut artistic
community over the past two decades has been immense—notwithstanding
that, as he put it, many, if not all of his books, most of which were
published by Forthcoming Books, “continue to be forthcoming even after
their publication.” In relation to one of these books, he wondered:
“Does not a book titled /Forthcoming/ suggest, ostensibly paradoxically,
a second edition?” Here’s the revised edition of/Forthcoming/, a book
first published nearly a decade and a half ago by Atelos press.



I once wrote, “I am not able to find my thoughts without passing through
his [Jalal Toufic's] words, books, and concepts.” Now, eight years
later, things seem to have gotten worse (or better). 
Jalal wrote in /Distracted/: 
— Are you saying this to me? 
— Also to myself. One should speak solely when also speaking to oneself.
Only then is there a dialogue.
I can also think of the following situation: 
— Are you saying this to me?
— Yes. And not to myself. And only to you.
Or an instance in which the following is heard: 
— Are you saying this to me? 
— Also to myself. One should speak solely when also speaking to oneself.
Only then is there a duologue.

life, landscapes, as well as natural and human phenomena. James
Benning’s role is that of eye-witness. His observations would seem
almost documentary-like were it not for the mathematical precision that
becomes clear when we examine his films. The image detail—mostly from a
central perspective—is always perfectly balanced, the play between image
and soundtrack is exact, the motive captured at the right moment by the
camera.

freedom, which isn’t new but is currently being rekindled and, above
all, revaluated.  

s

Benning lets the histories collide, not negotiating them in a
documentary manner, but developing a geography of spirit. The emphatic
atmosphere is created by the quality of Benning’s view, which is highly
concentrated and directed by the obsession to exceed mere narration. 

 
James Lee Byars loved what was imaginary and fleeting, equating the
ephemeral and the immaterial with the material and the everlasting. He
was not just an artist, he was a magician, a visionary and a dandy who
understood how to cast a spell over his audience.

He was always on the lookout for perfection. Byars often eschewed any
kind of materialisation in his works – they were mostly short-lived
performances. However, Byars also had a flair for beautiful, solid,
gleaming ‘eternal materials‘ – for sandstone, marble, glass and gold. He
created numerous sculptures and objects in an almost classical
repertoire of forms – using elements such as the sphere, the circle, the

The search for the ‘perfect’ provided the philosophical framework within
which Byars conceived his many artworks, events and performances. His
sculptures comprise simple and elemental geometric shapes: spheres,
cylinders, cubes and cones, all made to his exacting standards in the
finest glass, granite, marble, gold leaf and even red roses.


‘Wilf – a Life in Pictures’ is a fictional biography of an English
editorial cartoonist. Wilf’s career began in the early ’60s and lasted
through to his early retirement in the ’90s. Throughout his working life
he maintained friendships with a group of fellow cartoonists. Through
this invention ‘Wilf’ examine how codes of illustration and visual
styles change over time and chart the development of a mass graphic
language – showing how it felt, as well as how it looks at certain
moments in time and the thoughts of the group of cartoonists on their
personal and professional relationships over the period.

Pyman describes the book as ‘a biography from a parallel universe where
history is informed by the present’. Sixty of Wilf’s cartoons spanning a
thirty year period are represented together with invented archive
material and examples of his peers’ artwork. The book resembles an
artefact from a Blue Peter time capsule that has been sealed in and
allowed to age.

The work is of now. A key subject of the book is the decline of a common
newspaper culture, where editorial and strip cartoons detailed domestic
responses to global events. The cartoons reference political scandals
and minor historical incidents in a mix of nostalgia, reality and the
familiar, chosen with a politicised form of hindsight. Pyman is
interested in the way ordinary voices come through because of the power
of what they have to say.

Chisenhale Gallery presents a solo exhibition by James Richards
comprising a series of newly commissioned video works set within an
ambient display structure tailored to the gallery space and an
accompanying programme of events devised by the artist.

The exhibition features a suite of videos collaged from a collection of
found audiovisual footage as well as material recently filmed by
Richards. Working primarily between moving image, sound and sculpture,
Richards often merges these forms within individual works to interrogate
the experience of what it is to view and be viewed. This is placed in
parallel with his interest in the cultural and emotional resonance of
the vernacular visual content he chooses to manipulate, taken from a
range of sources such as viral web video footage, mainstream cinema,
experimental music and intimate video portraits of friends. Richards
often integrates collaborative strategies into his work, with some of
the material used in this exhibition gathered by Richards in exchange
with New York based artist Steve Reinke during their residency at The
Experimental Television Center (Owego, USA), whilst his events programme
also includes a number of external artistic voices.

by the weightless flat screens now commonly used for advertising in
metropolitan high streets. Juxtaposing his personal and highly
expressive methodology for composing moving image within a framework
more familiar to technological advertising space, Richards seeks to
understand our quotidian experiences of digital advertising as engaging
an emotional and complex set of relations between audience and images.

An extensive programme of events will be staged throughout the duration
of Richards’ exhibition at Chisenhale Gallery, including a new
collaboration with Haroon Mirza and Ed Atkins, contextual talks and two
screenings, one of which will feature a compilation of video material
woven together by Richards.



Conceived in homage to architect James Stirling, who believed that urban
design is integral to the practice of architecture and a vital topic for
public debate, the /James Stirling Memorial Lectures on the City/
competition was inaugurated in November 2003 as a unique forum for the
advancement of new critical perspectives on the role of urban design and
urban architecture in the development of cities worldwide.


In this project, curated by Jimena Blázquez Abascal, Turrell has managed
to create the illusion that the sky is just within our reach, blurring
the dividing line between matter and emptiness. To enter the skyspace is
to come closer to the immensity of the cosmos, making one question the
difference between vision and perception. Its importance also lies in
the fact that it is Turrell’s first permanent site-specific work
produced in Spain, and his largest in Europe.

His fascination with the phenomena of light is related to his personal,
inward search for mankind’s place in the universe. Influenced by his
Quaker upbringing, which he characterizes as having a ‘straightforward,
strict presentation of the sublime’, Turrell’s art prompts greater
self-awareness though a similar discipline of silent contemplation,
patience, and meditation.
The primary medium of Californian artist James Turrell is light.
Probably the best-known artist in his field, Turrell’s entire oeuvre
since the 1960s has been devoted to exploring the diverse manifestations
of this immaterial medium and working towards a new, space-defining form
of light art. While light here refers to nothing beyond itself, it
causes surface, colour and space to interact and allows viewers to
immerse themselves in a mysterious, painterly world.
By focussing on simple, repetitive motifs Welling sought to remove
photography from its insistence on the referent in order to arrive at
something approximating the ‘essence of perception.’ In concert with
Welling’s desire to see how we see, rather than what we see his reduced
yet very specific subject matter prompts a range of personal
associations in the viewer.

re:austria was formed as a response to the dramatic political changes in
Austria, with the goal to keep a constructive and active discussion
etc., alive and going in the next few years, by organizing
demonstrations, panels, and events.    
other forms of contemporary art are indeed possible. It is testimony to
the creative power of artists for whom painting, filming, drawing, and
sculpting are a way of understanding and experiencing the world.

Props, events, encounters: the performance of new sculpture takes its
cue from Mike Kelleys description of the inherent structure at work in
the objects that he uses in his performances. He ascribes to these
objects a self-governing ordering system that is enacted as they appear
in his work, a system that differentiates between objects that stay in
may or may not be revealed to the viewer. Many of these objects, left
behind in the gallery, are residues of past events, imbued with the
melancholia of lost opportunities. Others are detritus, arranged not so
simply.
/Props, events, encounters/ seeks to address the following questions:
How are contemporary artists changing the status of the object in their
work?
How might these modifications be aided and abetted by the presence of
the viewer?
How do such shifts in attitudes towards objects reflect a changing
politics in the status of contemporary sculpture?
Props, events, encounters: the performance of new sculpture is
generously supported by The Henry Moore Foundation and Outset.
In this international group exhibition drawing, by nature in flux and
mobile, is combined with animation techniques to create disjointed,
deeply affecting narratives.
As Barry Doupé points out, “Commercial computer animation has been on an
unsuccessful quest for humanistic realism, in that it often tries to
reproduce the human form precisely”. This exhibition exploits the
capacity of drawing to bring characters to life, however basic they
might be, a tradition much exploited through cartoons and caricature,
and through simple animation techniques.

In an era when Japan’s underground was reaching a fever pitch, Terayama
was a crucial player in a complex network of creative expression,
encompassing such countercultural legends as singer Akihiro Miwa,
photographer Daido Moriyama and graphic artist Tadanori Yokoo. A tribute
to this ‘many-headed’ artist, this survey centres both on his
astonishing film and video work and his trailblazing shifts through
varied media and performance. The series includes a symposium on
Terayama’s transmedia work and a live cinema performance in the Turbine
Hall. Terayama always made work that was interrelated, often producing
visionary and unexpected outcomes in whatever his chosen form.

This symposium brings together experts and collaborators to reflect on
the diverse media blend created by the Japanese poet, photographer and
books, films, photographs, and music are brought together to create a
unique and powerful picture. Testifying to the vitality and multifaceted
nature of mutual relations, /Side by Side/ explores the role of history
and representation by crafting national and cultural identities.
El Karchi is trying out the time-honoured genre of portrait painting and
has something of the ‘fine painter’ about him, whereas De Wit
demonstrates daring and bravura in his paintings and sculptures,
bringing together or ‘assembling’ all kinds of things. *El Karchi and De
Wit have a preference for figurative representation, especially of the
human figure and its personifications.*

Wit is a glutton. *He is also an all-rounder – a painter and sculptor
who can switch from one medium to the other with the utmost ease. A
nervous chaos winds its way through his work.*

De Wit shows us a hilarious, slightly ominous and mostly politically
incorrect world of shadows. *His assembled sculptures are created
through an associative process and have enormous dynamism, as if they
could jump right off their plinth.* What distinguishes this artist from
the rest is his tempestuous imagination and conceptual power. Comically,
provokingly and sometimes even poignantly, De Wit puts everything into
perspective and leaves it open as far as possible, with regard to both
form and content.
between spiritual customs and modernization.

Beginning to tell the story of Sigma Festival in Bordeaux is as
impossible as trying to make an exhaustive list of the events organised
between 1965 and 1996, unless one possesses an overwhelming taste for
the most extravagant associations—indeed, what could be more far
removed, and even contradictory, in its most fecund acceptation, than
*Karlheinz Stockhausen* and *Soft Machine*, *Nicolas Schöffer* and *Ben
Vautier*, *Sankaï Juku* and kinetic art, *Lucinda Childs*, *Philip
Glass* and *John Vaccaro’s /Play-House of Ridiculous/*, *Jan Fabre*, the
Living Theatre and the *Performance Group*, *Sun Ra* and *his
phrase? This is the issue at play in this unprecedented collaborative
project between a museum dedicated to contemporary artistic creation and
two institutions that retain the written, drawn, photographed, and
filmed sources of our collective memory.

Faced with the thousands of artistic events presented by Sigma, the CAPC
choses to privilege the most experimental practices, the ones that
redefined the outlines of their respective disciplines, even if this
meant inventing new ones. Experiments which use time and space as
materials therefore shatter the frozen frames of categories—theatre
leaves area of the stage, bodies loosen, exhibitions become works of
art, and art itself requires the public’s participation. Randomness and
improvisation are the new mottos which enable music, cinema, literature
and the other disciplines mentioned above to move into unknown aesthetic
regions.Polke doesn’t really require any introduction. His dot matrices are his
landmark trait, but as a whole his work incorporates infintely more. The
artist restlessly experiments with motifs, picture surfaces and
materials. This fact is amply on display in his current exhibition in
the Musem of Contemporary Art Siegen which features works that introduce
a new element, the method of lenticular printing. The works’ surfaces
are transparent and undulated, causing the infalling light to break.
This effect animates the viewer to stay in motion so as to be able to
see different images according to the angle from which a picture is
viewed. Polke is presenting over 80 works in the Siegen exhibition, 30
of which are new works utilizing the lenticular method and are to be
seen for the first time ever.fits into his philosophy, which accords more power to the representation
than to what is represented. And yet another technology has proved handy
here: Xeroxing. The original can be quickly whisked through, the
exposure interrupted or deliberately spoilt. Which results in heads with
elongated necks, sloping mountains and wild shadows – a cabinet of
deformed curiosities. Scarcely another artist has shown such zest in
experimenting with printing, and scarcely another has proved to be as
funny as Sigmar Polke.
